===== PAGE 1 =====
Device-Enhanced Password Protocols with Optimal
Online-Offline Protection
Stanislaw Jarecki Hugo Krawczyk
University of California Irvine IBM Research
stasio@ics.uci.edu hugo@ee.technion.ac.il
Maliheh Shirvanian Nitesh Saxena
University of Alabama at University of Alabama at
Birmingham Birmingham
maliheh@uab.edu saxena@cis.uab.edu
ABSTRACT word dictionaries from which a significant portion of passwords are
chosen. Candidate passwords for authenticating a user to a server
We introduce a setting that we call Device-Enhanced PAKE (DE-
can be tested by an attacker through online interactions with the
PAKE), where PAKE (password-authenticated key exchange) pro-
server. Furthermore, an attacker breaking into a server can mount
tocols are strengthened against online and offline attacks through
an offline attack that uses information stored on the server (typi-
the use of an auxiliary device that aids the user in the authentication
cally, a salted one-way mapping of the password) to test the differ-
process. We build such schemes and show that their security, prop-
ent passwords in the dictionary. Such offline dictionary attacks are
erly formalized, achieves maximal-attainable resistance to online
a serious concern, especially in light of frequent attacks against ma-
and offline attacks in both PKI and PKI-free settings. In particular,
jor commercial vendors recently, such as PayPal [1], LinkedIn [4],
an online attacker must guess the user’s password and also cor-
Blizzard [2] and Gmail [3]. The offline attacks are particularly dev-
rupt the user’s auxiliary device to authenticate, while an attacker
astating because a single server break-in may lead to compromising
who corrupts the server cannot learn the users’ passwords via an
a huge number of user accounts [7]. Furthermore, since many users
offline dictionary attack. Notably, our solutions do not require se-
re-use their passwords across multiple services, compromising one
cure channels, and nothing (in an information-theoretic sense) is
service may compromise user accounts at other services.
learned about the password by the device (or a malicious software
In this paper we present solutions which enhance password pro-
running on the device) or over the device-client channel, even with-
tocols against both online and offline attacks by an active man-in-
out any external protection of this channel. An attacker taking over
the-middle attacker acting on user-server and user-device links, and
the device still requires a full online attack to impersonate the user.
capable of compromising devices and servers by learning their full
Importantly, our DE-PAKE scheme can be deployed at the user end
internal state (e.g., server’s password file and device’s secrets).
without the need to modify the server and without the server having
to be aware that the user is using a DE-PAKE scheme. In particu-
1.1 Our Contributions
lar, the schemes can work with standard servers running the usual
password-over-TLS authentication. We introduce a setting of Device-Enhanced PAKE (DE-PAKE),
We use these protocols to implement a practical DE-PAKE sys- where PAKE (password-authenticated key exchange) protocol is
tem and we evaluate its performance. To improve usability the strengthened against online and offline attacks through the use of
implemented system utilizes automated and user-transparent data an auxiliary device which aids the user in the authentication pro-
channel between the mobile device and the client, falling back to cess. We build such scheme and show that its security, properly
localized communication if the device looses primary connectivity. formalized, achieves maximal-attainable resistance to online and
offline attacks in both PKI and PKI-free1 settings. Moreover, our
DE-PAKE scheme can be deployed at the user end without the need
1. INTRODUCTION
to modify the server and without the server having to be aware that
Today, passwords constitute the prevalent authentication mech- the user is using a DE-PAKE scheme. In particular, in the PKI
anism for bootstrapping security in most online applications (and setting the scheme can work with unmodified servers running the
many offline systems). A plethora of sensitive information stored usual password-over-TLS authentication. Finally, while we focus
in many different contexts therefore depends on the security of the presentation on a setting where the auxiliary device is a physical
password-based authentication. However, passwords are vulner- personal device, e.g. a phone, our protocols apply also to the set-
able to both online and offline dictionary attacks that build on pass- ting where the device entity is implemented by an auxiliary on-line
service. Indeed, since our solution is secure against a fully capa-
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 1The PAKE notion was originally used for the peer-to-peer pass-
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita- word setting (where the two peers share a password) but was later
tion on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than extended to the client-server setting too. In the latter case one
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re- differentiates between the PKI case, where the client possesses a
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission server’s certificate in addition to the password, and the PKI-free
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. case where no such certificate, or other form of secure channels,
ASIA CCS ’16, May 30-June 03, 2016, Xi’an, China is assumed for user login. Password registration, being much less
(cid:13)c 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4233-9/16/05. . . $15.00 frequent than regular login, can use special safeguards, such PKI-
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2897845.2897880 based interactions or out-of-band channels.
177

===== PAGE 2 =====
ble man in the middle and provides strong protection even in case 1.2 Related Work
of device corruption, an implementation that uses an auxiliary web
service in the role of the device is protected against both network Prior Work on Device-Enhanced Authentication. Our approach
attacks and against the compromise of this service. is closely related to the work of Acar, Belenkiy, and Kupcu [8],
and Boyen [13]. A close variant of the key ingredient of our so-
Secure and Efficient DE-PAKE Protocols: We introduce efficient
lution, a “Password-to-Random” (PTR) protocol, was proposed as
DE-PAKE protocols with the following properties:
a “Hidden Credential Retrieval” (HCR) scheme by [13]. Our DE-
PAKE protocol has similar goals as the “Single Password Authen-
• Resistance to online and offline attacks: Our DE-PAKE schemes
tication” (SPA) scheme of [8], namely, strengthening password au-
provide maximal-attainable security in terms of resistance to both
thentication by making offline dictionary attack against the server
online and offline attacks. That is, the only attack allowed by the
infeasible. Moreover, one of their schemes does so in roughly the
scheme is the unavoidable online guessing attack where the at-
same way as we do, following an approach first suggested by Ford-
tacker tests if a given value p is the user U’s password by inter-
Kaliski [17], i.e. having the user “strengthen” her password into
acting with both device and server in the role of U with password
a strong secret via the HCR/PTR protocol with an auxiliary de-
p and observing whether S accepts. In other words, each guess at-
vice (or service), and then use this strong secret to authenticate to
tempt requires the attacker to interact on both U-D and U-S links.
the primary server. Despite these similarities, our work improves
No amount of attacking on one link helps without a corresponding
on [8, 13] in the following aspects: (1) Whereas [13] shows that
attack on the other. Moreover, fully compromising D still requires
HCR can be realized almost identically to our PTR, i.e. using the
a full online guessing attack on the U-S link and fully compromis-
same variant of the Ford-Kaliski protocol [17], the SPA scheme
ing the server requires a full online guessing attack on the U-D link.
of [8] did not show a general compiler from HCR, but assumed a
And even if both S and D are compromised, a full offline dictionary
stronger tool of unique blind signature which is costlier to realize
attack is required. More formally, to have an impersonation prob-
(moreover, in their scheme the user-device blind signature protocol
ability of q/|Dict|, where Dict is the passwords dictionary, the at-
goes over TLS, while in ours the PTR protocol goes over insecure
tacker needs to either run q online interactions with D and q online
links); (2) The SPA scheme of [8] is weaker than our DE-PAKE,
interactions with S, or q online interactions with U impersonating
in that it achieves only entity authentication rather than authenti-
both D and S. Moreover, even when compromising D and finding
cated key exchange as in our case and it assumes PKI while our
all its secrets, the attacker still needs to run q online interactions
DE-PAKE works in both PKI-free and PKI settings;2 (3) Very im-
with either S or U, and if the server is compromised, q online in-
portantly, our modular approach that treats PTR and PAKE as in-
teractions with D or U. Finally, if both D and S are compromised
dependent components and has no involvement of the server in the
the adversary must stage a full offline dictionary attack to learn any
PTR execution, allows us to obtain DE-PAKE security without any
passwords. We formalize these properties through a security model
modification to existing servers (e.g., those running password-over-
that extends the traditional PAKE security setting, and then we use
TLS authentication). In contrast, the SPA scheme of [8] requires
this model to prove the security of our schemes.
the server to perform additional public key operations.
• PKI-agnostic: The above security is achieved even when the user-
Relation to Work on Two-Factor Authentication. One important
server channel is not protected by a server public key. On the other
and increasingly common line of defense against password attacks
hand, when such protection is available one obtains the additional
is the use of two-factor password authentication (TFA) schemes.
benefit that impersonating the server to the user is infeasible even
TFA mechanisms are used for authenticating a user U to a server
if the user’s password is disclosed. Luckily, our schemes can work,
S, and establishing a session key between the two, where the user
without modification and without having to be aware of it, with
has a password and a personal device D (e.g., a smartphone) that
PKI-based and PKI-free authentication protocols, providing in each
contains some secret auxiliary information. This secret information
case the best possible offline-online protection.
is used to increase the security of password authentication by pre-
• Modularity and server-transparency: Our design is modular al- venting online attacks for an adversary that does not have access to
lowing for the use of independent device and server components, D. Typically, D displays a short one-time PIN (OTP), received di-
in particular enabling the use of our scheme with existing password rectly from the server or computed by D based on a key shared with
protocols and without the need to modify the server side. the server, that the user manually copies over to the authentication
terminal in addition to providing her password.
DE-PAKE Systems Design and Evaluation: To demonstrate the Traditionally, these TFA schemes have been used for increas-
flexibility provided by our modular approach, we design, develop ing resistance to online dictionary attacks. However, as argued by
and test a concrete instantiation of DE-PAKE scheme in the PKI- Shirvanian et al. [29], with the increasing vulnerabilities of servers
free model. We develop server-side (PHP/JavaScript), client-side to compromise [5, 6], TFA schemes should also be enhanced to
(Chrome browser extensions) and device-side (Android app) im- strengthen security against offline attacks. The work of [29] pre-
plementations, and measure their computational performance and sented several schemes for achieving this goal. There are, however,
communication delays. A key component of DE-PAKE system is two important aspects in which the schemes of [29] can be im-
the D-U communication channel. To support this, we propose a proved, and we do so in this paper. First, all their schemes assume
“hybrid model” whereby the primary channel is based on fast and a PKI setting, namely, the user (through a client application) must
user-transparent data channel, and the secondary channel involves be in possession of an authentic public key of the server which is
localized WiFi communications. Since the secondary channel can used to establish a secure channel, e.g., via TLS. If such public
be potentially difficult for the user to establish, we use it only as key is not available or is compromised, the security of the scheme
a fall-back when the primary channel is not available (e.g., when completely breaks down. Given the vulnerabilities of PKI to certifi-
the user’s phone is out of network coverage). This approach will cation failures and man-in-the-middle (MitM) attacks (either due to
significantly improve the user experience underlying DE-PAKE lo-
gins. We design, implement and evaluate the performance of our 2Our DE-PAKE security model is also more precise, e.g. letting
DE-PAKE construction (Section 6). adversary observe whether user authentication succeeds or not.
178

===== PAGE 3 =====
programmatic errors or human mistakes), e.g., [15,20,30], reducing mation about protocol inputs, i.e. pwd and k. Note that we cannot
the dependency of authentication security on public keys is an in- assume an authenticated or secret channel between the client and
creasingly important goal. Second, the schemes of [29] require the D since this would either require knowing a device public key or
authentication server to run a different protocol than currently stan- storing pwd-related information at D (the latter would open pwd to
dard PKI-setting TFA schemes which can inhibit the deployment of an offline dictionary attack upon compromising D). We show that
such schemes. For example, an individual user (or an application) in spite of the client-device link being unauthenticated, hence con-
cannot adopt the schemes from [29] to protect her password stored trolled by the attacker, the “blinded DH" approach of Ford-Kaliski,
by a web service without that service being modified to support the (see Section 4.1), can be used to implement the PTR protocol.
new TFA method.
The notion of DE-PAKE scheme we propose (and its efficient
realization we construct) addresses many of the same concerns as
TFA schemes, e.g. increased security against on-line attacks viz-a- 1. k 1. pwd 3. rwd 3. σ (U)
d s
viz solely-password based authentication, and it surpasses security
offered by existing TFA schemes by offering maximal resistance PTR PAKE
to off-line attacks, i.e. making offline dictionary search impossible
in case of server compromise. However, traditional TFA schemes
offer also increased security against compromise of the client ma- 2. rwd = F kd (pwd) 4. K
chine (compared to solely-password authentication). A generic input
output
DE-PAKE scheme does not provide this, although the specific DE-
PAKE scheme we propose can be extended to offer additional de-
fenses against attacks on the client (see Section 5). Moreover, it is Figure 1: PTR-PAKE Authentication Phase
possible to combine a DE-PAKE scheme with a traditional MFA
mechanism (e.g. a one-time PIN delivered to or generated by the
Hence, we obtain a DE-PAKE scheme, which we call PTR-PAKE,
hand-held device) to extend the security properties of DE-PAKE to
as the composition of a PTR protocol and a secure PAKE. We de-
include the same level of resistance against client compromise as
pict this generic construction of a DE-PAKE protocol in Figure 1.
offered by traditional TFA schemes.
The output K in step 4 denotes the session key established between
1.3 Organization and Glossary the user and the server, i.e. the output of the DE-PAKE protocol,
which is equal to the output of the PAKE subprotocol. The server’s
We overview our design and proof methodology in Section 2,
input σ (U) to the PAKE subprotocol denotes the user-specific in-
with full details given in Section 4. Section 3 presents our formal S
formation stored at S created in the PAKE initialization using rwd
DE-PAKE security model on which we base our analysis. Section 5
in the role of the password (e.g. in a common PKI-based PAKE
presents protocol instantiations and extensions: A fully specified
σ (U) would be a salted hash of rwd).
DE-PAKE scheme secure in the PKI-free (i.e. CRS) model; a de- S
In order to prove the security of such scheme, we first extend the
scription of our approach for armoring existing servers against on-
established security models for the PAKE functionality to the DE-
line and offline attacks while keeping the servers unmodified; and
PAKE setting (Section 3). For the DE-PAKE modeling we consider
extensions which address issues related to client security (which are
a fully capable man-in-the-middle attacker active on all the links
not covered in our DE-PAKE model). In Section 6 we present our
between all parties and one who is allowed to compromise servers
system and implementation work and report on performance mea-
and devices at will. No external source of authentication is assumed
surements. For easy reference, in Table 1 we provide a summary of
other than the user’s password (except for secure registration of a
the main terms and acronyms used throughout the paper.
user with the server and device). Second, we define the security
requirements from a PTR protocol and show a PTR instantiation,
2. OVERVIEW: DESIGN AND ANALYSIS
FK-PTR, that satisfies this definition in the random oracle model.
Our design follows the “password hardening” approach of Ford Finally, we prove a generic security composition theorem showing
and Kaliski [17], but dispenses of authenticated channels (other that the composition of a secure PTR scheme (run between U and D
than during a registration phase), multiple servers and/or other safe- on the basis of the user’s password pwd) with a secure PAKE pro-
guards that were required for the secure use of these techniques in tocol (run between U and S on the basis of the hardened password
prior work [17, 21]. rwd = F (pwd)) results in a secure DE-PAKE scheme, provided
k
The idea is simple: the user memorizes a regular password pwd that the PAKE protocol satisfies “security against server compro-
but uses as her password with server S a value rwd = F (pwd) mise” or the more precise notion of KCI resistance introduced and
k
where F is a pseudorandom function and k is a key held by de- discussed in Section 3.1 (we note that typical protocols that store a
vice (or an auxiliary on-line service) D (rwd is a mnemonics for salted version of the password satisfy this property).
“randomized password"). Before authenticating to S, U contacts D Since our FK-PTR scheme does not require PKI, using a PKI-
(through a client application) and obtains rwd via a special proto- free PAKE in the above composition results in a DE-PAKE protocol
col with D (in which D learns nothing about pwd or rwd). U then that does not rely on public keys or other secure channels.
authenticates to S via a (standard) PAKE protocol using rwd as a In order to demonstrate full standalone solutions, in Section 5
password. Note that without knowledge of k, the value rwd has full we describe two instantiations of our PTR-PAKE construction of a
entropy (in the range set of function F ) hence dictionary attacks do DE-PAKE scheme. First, we compose our FK-PTR scheme with
not apply against rwd (neither online or offline attacks, not even if a specific PAKE protocol - a KCI-resistant version of the single-
the server is compromised). Moreover, we will ensure that even if server variant of threshold PAKE from [22, 23]. Since this PAKE
D (or S) is compromised, offline attacks against pwd are infeasi- protocol does not require PKI, neither does the resulting DE-PAKE
ble. Thus, the challenge is in implementing the protocol between protocol. Secondly, we expand on the fact that since our PTR-
U and D, to which we refer as PTR (for Password-to-Random), so PAKE construction can be used with any existing password proto-
that U can compute F (pwd) but the protocol leaks no other infor- col with resistance to KCI attacks, one obtains DE-PAKE schemes
k
179

===== PAGE 4 =====
Table 1: Glossary
Acronym Description
Password-authenticated key exchange. We refer to password protocols by PAKE as well as to
PAKE
their security model (recalled in Section 3.1).
A PAKE protocol that does not assume any secret or authenticated key carried by the user other
PKI-Free PAKE than its own password. In particular, no PKI-based server-authentication is assumed.
This is also known as the CRS or password-only model.
A new notion of Device-Enhanced PAKE protocols that guarantees optimal resilience to offline and
DE-PAKE online attacks upon compromise of device and/or server. We use DE-PAKE to refer to the security
model (Section 3.2) as well as to the constructions satisfying this model (Sections 4 and 5) .
A security notion and model for password hardening protocols. We use PTR (password-to-random) to
PTR
refer to the security model (Section 4.2) as well as to the constructions satisfying this model (Section 4.1).
FK-PTR Specific PTR construction using the Ford-Kaliski password hardening technique (Section 4.1).
Oblivious PRF (see Section 4.1) is the basis for the FK-PTR protocol.
OPRF
When implemented via the function F k (x) = H(x, (H(cid:48)(x))k) we obtain FK-PTR.
A general name for DE-PAKE protocols built by composing a PTR and a PAKE protocols
PTR-PAKE
(their generic security is based on Theorem 3)
A PTR-PAKE scheme where the PTR part is implemented with the FK-PTR construction. It is also the
FK-PTR-PAKE
name of the protocol in Fig 3 that combines FK-PTR with the PKI-free PAKE protocol of [22, 23].
without changing the server that implements the PAKE protocol. Both users and servers may execute the protocol multiple times in a
In particular, this allows us to use without any change a server that concurrent fashion. Each execution of the PAKE protocol by U or S
implements the standard PKI-based password-over-TLS protocol. defines a (user or server) protocol instance, also referred to as a pro-
A PTR scheme is a close variant of OPRF, and the potential of tocol session, denoted respectively ΠU or ΠS, where integer pointer
i i
OPRF to strengthen password authentication was recently used in i serves to differentiates between multiple protocol instances exe-
the Pythia system [16], but their proposal differs from ours in at cuted by the same party. Each protocol session is associated with
least three ways: (1) Their OPRF scheme is significantly more the following variables: a session identifier sid, which we equate
costly than our PTR: it requires 6 exponentiations and a bilinear with the message transcript observed by this instance (where both
map compared to 3 exponentiations in our PTR scheme (and we U and S order their interaction transcripts starting with U’s mes-
can use elliptic curves without bilinear maps where exponentiations sage), a peer identity pid, and a session key sk. For a user instance
are cheaper); (2) Their solution relies on PKI, while ours does not; the peer is always the user’s server while for a server instance the
(3) Their solution does not offer a server-transparent instantiation. peer is the user authenticated in the session. The output of an exe-
cution consists of the above three variables which can be set to ⊥ if
3. SECURITY MODEL the party aborts the session (e.g., when authentication fails, a mis-
formed message is received, etc.). When a session outputs sk (cid:54)=⊥
We introduce the Device-Enhanced PAKE (DE-PAKE) security
we say that the session accepts.
model under which we prove the security of our schemes. The
model extends the standard PAKE (Password Authenticated Key PAKE Security. To define security we consider a probabilistic at-
Exchange) formalisms to include user-specific devices and formu- tacker A which schedules all actions in the protocol and controls
lates a security definition that guarantees maximal online and of- all communication channels with full ability to transport, modify,
fline security of password protocols. We start by recalling the PAKE inject, delay or drop messages. In addition, the attacker knows (or
security model (adapted to the client-server setting) and then we even chooses) the dictionaries used by users. The model defines the
present the extension of the PAKE model to the DE-PAKE setting. following queries or activations through which the adversary inter-
acts with, and learns information from, the protocol’s participants.
3.1 PAKE Security Model
send(P, i, P (cid:48), M): Delivers message M to instance ΠP purport-
i
We recall the security model for PAKE (Password-based Authen- edly coming from P (cid:48). In response to a send query the instance
ticated Key Exchange) protocols, based on the model of Bellare, takes the actions specified by the protocol and outputs a message
Pointcheval and Rogaway [10] that extends authenticated key ex- given to A. When a session accepts, a message indicating accep-
change models to account for the inherent vulnerability of pass- tance is given to A. A send message with a new value i (possibly
word protocols to online guessing attacks. We adapt the PAKE with null M) creates a new instance at P with pid P (cid:48). For simplic-
model to the client-server setting borrowing some of the formalism ity, we assume that the pair {P, P (cid:48)} in any send message contains
from [22], and we recall an extension of this standard PAKE model a user and the server associated to that user (a non-compliant mes-
to security against server compromise. sage causes the receiving instance to abort). The send query can
Protocol participants. There are two types PAKE protocol partic- also create a new instance of party P : If ΠU i does not exist then
ipants, users and servers. Each user U is associated with a unique query send(U, i, S, init) creates a new instance ΠU i which executes
server S while servers may be associated with multiple users. with pid = S on U’s chosen password pwd. Similarly, if ΠS i does
not exist then send(S, i, U, M) creates a new instance ΠS which
Protocol execution. A PAKE protocol has two phases: initial- i
executes with pid = U on S’s input σ (U), with U’s first message
ization and key exchange. In the initialization phase each user U S
set to M. (This formalism assumes that protocol exchanges are
chooses a random password pwd from a given dictionary Dict and
initiated by users, which is the operational setting in PAKE.)
interacts with its associated server S producing a user’s state σ (U)
S
that S stores while U only remembers its password pwd. Initial- reveal(P, i): If instance ΠP i has accepted, outputs the respective
ization is assumed to be executed securely, e.g., over secure chan- session key sk; otherwise outputs ⊥.
nels. In the key exchange phase, users interact with servers over corrupt(P ): Outputs all data held by party P and A gains full con-
insecure (adversary-controlled) channels to establish session keys. trol of P . We say that P is corrupted.
180

===== PAGE 5 =====
compromise(S, U): Outputs state σ (U) at S. S is U-compromised. in our terminology) does not allow the attacker to authenticate that
S
test(P, i): If instance ΠP has accepted, this query causes ΠP to user to the server except after running an offline dictionary attack
flip a random bit b. If b = i 1 the instance’s session key sk is ou i tput that recovers the password given the server’s state.3 In the key-
and if b = 0 a string drawn uniformly from the space of session exchange literature an attack in which the compromise of a party P
keys is output. A test query may be asked at any time during the allows the attacker to falsely authenticate another party P (cid:48) to P is
execution of the protocol, but may only be asked once. We will called a Key-Compromise Impersonation (KCI) attack [12]. There-
refer to the party P against which a test query was issued and to its fore, the above notion of security against server compromise can be
peer as the target parties. seen as a weak form of KCI resistance, where impersonation of U
The following notion taken from [22] is used in the security defi- to S is possible but only after running an offline dictionary attack.
nition below to ensure that legitimate messages exchanged between We extend the above PAKE formalism to capture resistance to
honest parties do not help the attacker in online password guess- weak KCI attacks (wKCI-resistance) through the following game
ing attempts (only adversarially-generated messages count towards (which is well-suited to ROM-based implementations that hash the
such online attacks). It has similar motivation as the execute query password). The security experiment is as before except for the fol-
in [10], but the latter fails to capture the ability of the attacker to lowing changes. User U (associated with server S) chooses its pass-
delay and interleave messages from different sessions. word at random from a dictionary Dict, where Dict is a random
subset of {0, 1}τ of size 2d (for integers d<τ ). The attacker A
Rogue send queries/activations: We say that a send(P, i, P (cid:48), M)
is given a random subset of Dict of size q as well as the server’s
query is rogue if it was not generated and/or delivered according to
state σ (U), and it must choose the test session at an instance of
the specification of the protocol, i.e. message M has been changed S
S with peer U (in the regular case this is not allowed since S is U-
or injected by the attacker, or the delivery order differs from what
compromised). We call a PAKE scheme (cid:15)-wKCI-resistant if for any
is stipulated by the protocol (delaying message delivery or inter- q ≤ 2d, the attacker’s advantage in this game is at most q/2d + (cid:15).
leaving messages from different sessions is not considered a rogue
A strong notion of KCI resistance is achieved in the DE-PAKE
operation as long as internal session ordering is preserved). We also
model as we will see next.
consider as rogue any send(P, i, P (cid:48), M) query where P is uncor-
rupted and P (cid:48) is corrupted. We refer to messages delivered through 3.2 DE-PAKE Security Model
rogue send queries as rogue activations by A.
We extend the PAKE model to the DE-PAKE setting. Besides
Matching sessions. A session in instance ΠP and a session in in-
i servers and users in the PAKE model, each user is associated with
stance ΠP j (cid:48) are said to be matching if both have the same session a device D with which it communicates over a two-way link. (We
identifier sid (i.e., their transcripts match), the first has pid = P (cid:48), stress that the role of D can be played by any data-connected en-
the second has pid = P , and both have accepted. tity, including a hand-held device or an auxiliary web service.) The
Fresh sessions. A session at instance ΠP with peer P (cid:48) s.t. {P, P (cid:48)} = initialization phase of PAKE is extended to include the user-device
i
{U, S} is called fresh if none of the queries corrupt(U), corrupt(S), communication that establishes the state stored at D. As before,
compromise(S, U), reveal(P, i) or reveal(P (cid:48), i(cid:48)) were issued, where users only remember their passwords. As in the PAKE case, ini-
ΠP(cid:48) is an instance whose session matches ΠP (if such ΠP(cid:48) exists). tialization (including the user-device interaction) is assumed to run
i(cid:48) i i(cid:48)
over secure channels. After initialization, the links between users
Correctness. Matching sessions between uncorrupted peers output
and devices are subject to the same man-in-the-middle adversar-
the same session key.
ial activity as in the links between users and servers. Device in-
Attacker’s advantage. Let PAKE be a PAKE protocol and A be an stances ΠD are created similarly to user and server instances, and
i
attacker with the above capabilities running against PAKE. Assume are activated by A via send queries that include users and devices
that A issues a single test query against a fresh session at a user or as senders and receivers. However, device instances do not pro-
server and ends its run with an output bit b(cid:48). We say that A wins duce output other than the outgoing messages. In particular, reveal
if b(cid:48) = b where b is the bit chosen internally by the test session. queries do not apply to them, but corrupt queries can be issued
The advantage of A against PAKE is defined as Adv A PAKE = 2 · against devices, in which case the internal state of the device is
P r [A wins against PAKE] − 1. revealed to A who then controls the device. The session-related
notions, including the test query, do not apply to devices.
Definition 1. A PAKE protocol PAKE is (q S , q U , T, (cid:15))-secure if it The attacker’s goal is the same as before, i.e. to win the test ex-
is correct and for any password dictionary Dict and any attacker
periment at a user or server instance, as in the PAKE setting. Also
A that runs in time T , it holds that AdvPAKE ≤ qU +qS + (cid:15) where
A |Dict| the correctness property is unchanged. However, to the attacker re-
q U is the number of rogue send queries having the target user U sources we add the number of rogue send queries (see Section 3.1)
as recipient and q S is the number of rogue send queries having the where the target user is the recipient and the device the sender (de-
target S as recipient. noted q(cid:48) ) and the number of rogue send queries where the target
U
user is the sender and the device the recipient (denoted q ). We
Dictionary size 2d. Our treatment works for any dictionary size, D
refer to this more powerful adversary as a DE-PAKE attacker.
but for notational convenience we denote it as 2d.
Strong KCI resistance. The DE-PAKE model is intended to pro-
Security against server compromise and KCI-resistance. In the
vide a much stronger notion of security in case of server compro-
asymmetric client-server setting of password authentication that
mise than achievable in the PAKE case. While in the latter, imper-
concerns us in this paper, plain passwords should not be stored at
sonating U to S in case of U-compromise is possible (and unavoid-
the server, so as to prevent the leakage of the password in case of
able) through an offline dictionary attack, in DE-PAKE protocols
server compromise. Instead, the server should store some other
verification information corresponding to this password, such as
3Recovering the password via an offline dictionary attack is un-
the salted password hash. The security requirement in this case, avoidable in the PAKE model. Also unavoidable is impersonating
often referred to as security against server compromise [19], is that S to U when S is U-compromised (except if one assumes, as in the
access to the server’s state for a particular user (i.e, U-compromise PKI model, an independent authenticated channel from S to U).
181

===== PAGE 6 =====
this is prohibited. In order to formalize this requirement we fol- Note on client security. The DE-PAKE model is designed to cap-
low the treatment of KCI resistance from [27] and we strengthen ture (maximal) security against online and offline attacks where the
the capabilities of a DE-PAKE attacker through a more liberal no- attacker fully controls all communication channels and can com-
tion of fresh sessions at a server S. All sessions considered fresh in promise servers and devices. However, as it is customary in the
the PAKE model are also considered fresh in the DE-PAKE model; PAKE setting, the model does not consider the security of the ma-
in addition, in the DE-PAKE model, a session ΠS at server S with chine (the “client") into which the user enters the password. Yet,
i
peer U is considered fresh even if corrupt(S) or compromise(S, U) our solutions, while vulnerable to some forms of attack by an at-
were issued as long as all other requirements for freshness are sat- tacker controlling the client machine, also provide defenses to com-
isfied and the attacker A does not have access to the temporary mon attacks such as keyloggers or phishing attacks (see Section 5).
state information created by session ΠS. This relaxation of the no- 4. A MODULAR DE-PAKE SCHEME
i
tion of freshness captures the case where the attacker A might have
In this section we present and analyze our generic DE-PAKE
corrupted S and gained access to S’s secrets (including long-term
scheme, i.e. the PTR-PAKE shown in Figure 1, which results from
ones), yet A is not actively controlling S during the generation of
the composition of two independent cryptographic primitives, a
session ΠS. In this case we would still want to prevent A from au-
i PTR protocol and a PAKE protocol with resistance to wKCI attacks
thenticating as U to S on that session. Definition 2 (item 2) below
(see section 3.1). For a high-level description of the functionality
ensures that this is the case for DE-PAKE secure protocols even
of a PTR (password-to-random) scheme and its use for obtaining a
when unbounded offline attacks against S are allowed.
DE-PAKE scheme see Section 2. We start by describing a specific
The following security definition captures the maximal-attainable
efficient PTR implementation we call FK-PTR, with is based on the
online and offline security from a DE-PAKE protocol as informally
“password hardening” protocol of Ford-Kaliski [17] (Section 4.1).
discussed in the introduction. Let DPK be a DE-PAKE protocol and
We then use this protocol example to formalize the PTR notion
A be an attacker with the above capabilities running against DPK.
and its security requirements (Section 4.2), and we prove that the
As in the PAKE model, we assume that A issues a single test query
FK-PTR protocol satisfies the PTR security notion (Section 4.3).
against some U or S session, that A output bit b(cid:48), and we say that
Finally, we prove that the generic composition of any secure PTR
A wins if b(cid:48) = b where b is the bit chosen by the test session. We
define Adv
A
DPK = 2 · P r [A wins against DPK] − 1. s
s
c
u
h
lt
e
s
m
in
e
a
a
s
n
e
d
c
a
u
n
re
y
D
PA
E-
K
P
E
AK
sc
E
he
s
m
ch
e
em
wi
e
th
(S
r
e
e
c
s
t
i
i
s
o
ta
n
n
4
c
.
e
4)
to
. T
w
h
K
us
C
,
I
o
a
u
t
r
ta
s
c
c
k
h
s
em
re
e
-
Definition 2. A DE-PAKE protocol is called (q , q , q(cid:48) , q , T, (cid:15))-
S U U D can be instantiated with the FK-PTR scheme as the PTR part and
secure if it is correct, and for any password dictionary Dict of size
any secure wKCI-resistant PAKE protocol (e.g., [19, 22]). More-
2d and any attacker that runs in time T , the following properties over, if the PAKE scheme is in the password-only model4 then the
hold (for q , q , q(cid:48) , q as defined above):
S U U D DE-PAKE scheme is also secure in this model.
1. If S and D are uncorrupted, the following bound holds:
4.1 The FK-PTR Scheme
min{q + q , q(cid:48) + q }
AdvDPK ≤ U S U D + (cid:15). (1) The instantiation of a PTR scheme we call FK-PTR is based on
A 2d Ford-Kaliski’s “password hardening" [17] or its more general in-
2. If D is corrupted then AdvDPK ≤ (q + q )/2d + (cid:15). terpretation as an Oblivious PRF (OPRF) [18,25,26]. Roughly, an
A U S OPRF is a pseudorandom function that is computed by two parties,
3. If S is corrupted then AdvDPK ≤ (q(cid:48) + q )/2d + (cid:15).
A U D one that holds the key to the function and learns nothing from the
4. When both D and S are corrupted, expression (1) holds but computation, and one that holds an input and learns the output of
q D and q S are replaced by the number of offline operations the function on that input and nothing else.5 In Figure 2 we present
performed based on D’s and S’s state, respectively. a particular instantiation of the PTR-PAKE protocol, which we call
FK-PTR-PAKE, that results from a composition of FK-PTR, which
Note that the bounds in items 3 and 4 hold also when S is U-
is a specific instantiation of a PTR scheme, with a PAKE scheme.
compromised (since being corrupted implies U-compromise for all
Figure 2 fully specifies the FK-PTR protocol, which is an interac-
users U associated with S).
tion between U and D by which U retrieves a random value rwd
Note on modeling DE-PAKE via a (2,2)-TPAKE. In a (t + 1, n) with the help of its password pwd. At initialization, U chooses and
threshold-PAKE (TPAKE) (cf. [22]), a user holding a single pass- remembers password pwd while D chooses and stores k ← Z .
q
word can securely establish authenticated keys with a subset of n To retrieve rwd, U first blinds pwd by raising the hashed value
servers as long as no more than t of them are corrupted (and the H(cid:48)(pwd) to a random exponent ρ, and send it to D. This perfectly
user interacts with at least t + 1 well-behaving servers). One can hides pwd from D and from any eavesdropper on the U − D link.
implement DE-PAKE on the basis of (2,2)-TPAKE by letting D and D checks that the received value is in the group G and if so it raises
S act as the two servers in a (2,2)-TPAKE scheme (this would imply it to the secret exponent k. Now, U can de-blind this value by rais-
the first three conditions of Definition 2 but the last one should be
4This model assumes that user/password registration is imple-
added as an additional requirement). Moreover, one can use (2,2)-
mented over secure channels but user authentication after registra-
TPAKE as the basis for the definition of DE-PAKE where the user
tion does not assume public keys or secure channels for any party
only authenticates to one of the parties. However, the dedicated in the system - only the existence of public parameters, e.g., for
DE-PAKE definition we present, and its instantiations, provide sev- defining an elliptic curve, is assumed. These parameters are com-
eral advantages: (1) It makes the security goals for the DE-PAKE mon to all users and are part of the client program run by a user;
notion clearer; (2) It allows for a more precise specification of the they require the same integrity guarantees as the program itself.
(strict) upper bounds on attacker’s advantage depending on the at- 5We use the PTR notion instead of existing OPRF definitions be-
tack setting; and (3) It allows for more efficient implementations, cause game-based OPRF notions, e.g. [18, 25], do not seem to en-
able our PTR-to-DEPAKE compiler, while the UC OPRF of [22]
in particular enabling a server-transparent DE-PAKE implementa-
includes verifiability, which is costlier to achieve than PTR. How-
tion, which cannot be done using TPAKE. (A TPAKE cannot be ever, it is possible that the recent UC notion of non-verifiable OPRF
server-transparent because if S runs the code as in PAKE then S’s [23] would suffice in our compiler. (Note that the FK-PTR scheme
presence cannot help U to authenticate to D.) is identical to the OPRF construction in [23].)
182

===== PAGE 7 =====
Setup
• Group G. The scheme works over a cyclic group G of prime order q, |q| = (cid:96), with generator g.
• Hash functions H, H(cid:48) map arbitrary-length strings into elements of {0, 1}τ and G, respectively, where τ is a security parameter.
• OPRF. For a key k ← Zq, we define function F k as F k (x) = H(x, (H(cid:48)(x))k).
• Parties. User U, Device D, Server S.
• Dictionary Dict of size 2d (a power of 2 is used for notational convenience only).
• Any PAKE protocol Π.
Initialization Phase (assumed to be executed over secure links)
• FK-PTR Initialization: U chooses password pwd ← Dict; D chooses and stores OPRF key k ← Zq; U interacts with D to compute rwd = F k (pwd).
• PAKE Initialization: User U and server S are initialized with value rwd used as a password according to the specification of PAKE protocol Π.
Login Phase
• User-Device Interaction (FK-PTR)
1. U chooses ρ ← Zq; sends α = (H(cid:48)(pwd))ρ to D.
2. D checks that the received α ∈ G and if so it responds with β = αk.
3. U sets rwd = H(pwd, β1/ρ).
• User-Server Interaction (PAKE)
Follows the specification of the PAKE protocol Π where U uses rwd as its password.
Figure 2: The FK-PTR-PAKE Scheme
ing it to the power 1/ρ to obtain H(cid:48)(pwd)k. Finally, U hashes this the PTR requirements to the minimum necessary is pivotal for ob-
value with pwd to obtain the randomized password rwd. taining our very efficient FK-PTR implementation that would not
Note that D contains no information related to pwd hence an be possible otherwise.
attacker interacting with D or even breaking into it learns nothing
Attack avenue 1: Leakage on rwd = F (pwd). Given that A can
about pwd. Also, U does not run any test on the value reconstructed k
obtain values in RDict by interacting with D on input any pass-
in the FK-PTR protocol. Hence, an attacker that interacts with U
word in Dict we need to assure that nothing in the scheme leaks
in the role of D does not learn anything about pwd from watching
information on the specific value of rwd = F (pwd) or otherwise
the behavior of U. These “obliviousness" and minimality proper- k
the attacker can use this information to gain advantage on guessing
ties of FK-PTR are essential to achieve PTR security and make the
which of the RDict values is more plausible to be the correct rwd
security analysis challenging. We will use this scheme to moti-
(e.g., it shouldn’t be possible for A to test a possible value p as a
vate the security requirements from a PTR scheme as needed for
candidate for pwd or to test a value r as a candidate for rwd). More
composing it with a PAKE protocol and obtain a secure DE-PAKE
generally, to apply PAKE we need to ensure that the view of the
protocol. We establish these requirements in the next subsection
attacker at the end of the PTR run is independent, computationally
and then prove the security of FK-PTR.
or statistically, from rwd.
4.2 PTR Security Model To capture this property we define the following experiment re-
ferred to as the distinguishing test. Define RDict as {F (p) : p ∈
Here we present the security model for (generic) PTR schemes. k
Dict} where k is D’s secret key. Let rwd = F (pwd) and choose
We first define the adversarial game underlying this model and then k
r ← RDict \ {rwd}. A is given both rwd, r (in random order) and
use the FK-PTR scheme and explicit potential attacks against it to
it needs to guess which one equals F (pwd).
motivate the security definition. k
PTR adversarial game. The game is parameterized by a function Attack avenue 2: Learning values in RDict. Since A can learn
family F and a password dictionary Dict of size 2d for some d values in RDict by interacting with D, A can later interact with S
(the power of two is chosen for notational convenience only). User in the PAKE protocol using these values. Thus, the best we can
U is initialized with password pwd ← Dict and device D with a do is to require the PTR protocol not to leak to A more than one
key k defining function F . Later, the parties interact so that in value in RDict for each interaction with D. We formalize this by
k
an undisturbed interaction between U and D, where U runs with defining a game where the attacker, at the end of its run, outputs
input pwd, U outputs the secret rwd = F (pwd). Attacker A has a set of candidate values in RDict, and requiring that this set does
k
oracle access to U and D, calling these parties with any message not contain more than q D correct values where q D is the number of
of its choice and receiving the corresponding response as defined rogue activations of D by A.
by the scheme depending on the internal secrets and state of the
Attack avenue 3: Using U to test passwords. Since the attacker can
responding party. The security requirements are defined below in
influence the values output by U in the PTR protocol, the possibility
Definition 3 but we first motivate them as follows. exists, at least in principle, that A makes U output a value F (pwd(cid:48))
k
Attack avenues and PTR security requirements. We define se- where pwd(cid:48) ∈ Dict is known to A. In this case, A can observe the
curity of a PTR scheme in a way that guarantees that the generic PAKE run of U with S and see if pwd(cid:48) is the correct password.
composition of PTR and PAKE protocols results in a secure DE- This allows A to test passwords in Dict without having to act as
PAKE scheme. The definition consists of several requirements that an active MitM in the PAKE protocol between U and S. While
we motivate next via concrete attacks showing these requirements this attack is not possible against FK-PTR (as we will prove later),
to be necessary (and by virtue of Thm. 3 also sufficient). Reducing one can show PTR schemes where this attack is feasible. There are
183

===== PAGE 8 =====
two ways of dealing with this issue. We either show that any such 1. the probability that A passes the distinguishing test of attack
“dictated password” requires a specific rogue activation of D (as in avenue 1 is at most 1/2 + (cid:15) ;
1
Attack 2 above) hence treating it as any other password in RDict 2. the probability that A outputs more than q D values in RDict
that A may learn by interacting with D or we require that a secure following attack avenue 2 is at most (cid:15) 2 ;
PTR scheme does not allow for such attack. The latter is better as it 3. the probability that U outputs F k (pwd(cid:48)) for pwd(cid:48) ∈ Dict \
prevents A from testing passwords without a rogue activation of U {pwd} is at most (cid:15) 3 ;
but the former can be acceptable in a protocol that allows the attack. 4. the probability that f c , as defined in attack avenue 4, is not
Given that our FK-PTR protocol does not allow the attacker to use 1-1 is less than (cid:15) 4 .
U as an oracle for testing passwords in RDict \ {rwd}, we choose where in all four cases the probability goes over random PTR key
the stronger notion by adding an explicit requirement against such k and random pwd in Dict.
possibility.
4.3 Security of the FK-PTR Scheme
To prevent this we require that U’s PTR output equals F (pwd(cid:48))
k
for pwd(cid:48) ∈ Dict \ {pwd} with at most negligible probability. Theorem 1 below summarizes the security of the FK-PTR scheme
in terms of Definition 3. It uses the One-More Gap Diffie-Hellman
Attack avenue 4: Running U on passwords outside RDict. The assumption defined next.
PTR-PAKE composition presents an attack avenue not present in
regular PAKE protocols: A can make U run the PAKE protocol Note on proofs: Proofs for all statements below are in [24].
on a password from a dictionary RDict∗ different than RDict (note The One-More Gap DH (OMG-DH) Assumption [9, 26]: Let G
that this is different from attack scenario 3). To see this, consider an be a group of prime order q and k a random value in Z q . Let DH k
attack in which A impersonates D to U running the protocol with be an oracle7 that on input g ∈ G outputs gk, and let DDH k be
a key k(cid:48) chosen by A. As a consequence, U will run the PAKE an oracle that on input a pair (a, b) answers whether b = ak. We
protocol with the value F k(cid:48)(pwd), i.e., with a value uniformly dis- say that G satisfies the (cid:15) omg -OMG-DH assumption for function
tributed over RDict∗ = {F k(cid:48)(p) : p ∈ Dict} where RDict∗ is (cid:15) omg if any attacker A that runs in time T has probability at most
known to A. This allows A to attack the PAKE protocol as follows. (cid:15) omg (T, q dh , q ddh ) to win the following game: A is given access to
It impersonates S to U as if the server’s state was initialized with the DH k and DDH k oracles, which it queries q dh and q ddh times,
password F k(cid:48)(p) for p ∈ Dict. If p = pwd, A succeeds in the resp., and is given a set R of random elements in G. It wins if it
impersonation and learns pwd.6 This attack is not contemplated outputs q dh + 1 different pairs (g, gk), g ∈ R.
in standard PAKE models where the user is assumed to run with
Theorem 1. Let G be a group where the (cid:15) (·)-One-More Gap
a password from the specified dictionary and without adversarial omg
DH holds. Let the hash functions H, H(cid:48) be modeled as random
choice of the password. To illustrate the dangers of such attack,
oracles and q be the number of invocations to H. Then, the FK-
imagine that the family F has a key k∗ such that F k∗(·) is a con-
PTR scheme r
H
un over group G with a dictionary Dict ⊂ {0, 1}τ is
stant function (with an output known to A). This is a real possibil-
(q , q , T, (cid:15))-secure where (cid:15) = max{(cid:15) , (cid:15) , (cid:15) , (cid:15) } with (cid:15) = 0,
ity against FK-PTR if we define F (p) to be H((H(cid:48)(p)k) in which D U 1 2 3 4 1
k (cid:15) ≤ T /2τ + (cid:15) (T, q , q ), (cid:15) ≤ 1/2τ , (cid:15) ≤ |Dict|2/2τ .
case k∗ = 0 has exactly this effect. Similarly, if there is a key 2 omg D H 3 4
k∗ for which F k∗ is a t-to-1 function, A could discard t passwords Note: The bound |Dict|2/2τ on (cid:15) 4 can be reduced significantly
with each S-impersonation attempt against U. Again, this is possi- if one relaxes requirement 4 of PTR security to allow for some
ble against FK-PTR with the modified F where A can choose β(cid:48), deviation from injectiveness, e.g., allowing RDict to be of size α ·
k
the response returned to U, to be in a group of small-order. (Such |Dict| for some α, say α = 1/2.
an implementation of FK-PTR would require to test β(cid:48) ∈ G \ {1}.)
Lemma 2. Let G be a group where the (cid:15) -One-More Gap DH
To prevent this attack avenue we require that any attack strategy assumption holds and model hash function om s g H, H(cid:48) as random or-
by A for generating a dictionary RDict∗ induces a 1-1 function.
acles. Let A be a PTR-attacker against the FK-PTR scheme that
We formalize this as follows. Let c denote a set of coins for parties
runs time T and activates D q times with values chosen by A
U, D, A in a PTR run. For any such c define f (p) as the output D
c (i.e., rogue activations). Then, the probability that A outputs more
from U if its password was p. We require that except for negligible
than q values in RDict (as in attack avenue 2) is at most (cid:15) =
probability over the choice of c, f c is 1-1. (Note that each such c T /2τ + D (cid:15) (T (cid:48), q , q ) where q is the number of invocat 2 ions
defines a dictionary RDict∗ = {f c (p) : p ∈ Dict} of size |Dict|.) of H by A o a m n g d T (cid:48) ≈ D T . H H
We are now ready to define PTR security.
4.4 PTR-PAKE Composition Theorem
Definition 3. We say that a PTR scheme is (q , q , T, (cid:15))-secure if
D U We are now ready to prove the composition theorem showing
for any PTR attacker A that runs time T and performs q and q
D U that composing a secure PTR with a PAKE that offers the wKCI-
rogue activations of D and U, respectively, (cid:15) is an upper bound on
resistance property, results in a secure DE-PAKE scheme (with se-
the values (cid:15) , (cid:15) , (cid:15) , (cid:15) defined as follows (these (cid:15) are functions of
1 2 3 4 i curity definitions as presented in Section 3). As noted earlier, if the
q , q , T and they correspond to the above attack avenues):
D U PTR and PAKE schemes dispense of PKI so does our DE-PAKE
protocol: An example of such composed scheme free of PKI (ex-
6This attack recovers pwd with 2d impersonation attempts (of S)
cept for initialization) is presented in Section 5.
against U and it only requires one value F k(cid:48)(pwd) used by U as
its PAKE password. This does not imply a break of the DE-PAKE Theorem 3. Let P be a (q , q(cid:48) , T , (cid:15) )-secure PTR scheme and
D U P P
scheme, since for each impersonation attempt against U, A needs Π be a (q , q , T , (cid:15) )-secure PAKE protocol that is also (cid:15) -
S U Π Π KC
to perform a rogue activation of U in PTR. If q U (cid:48) is the number of wKCI-resistant, then the DE-PAKE scheme C that uses the compo-
rogue activation of U in PTR and q U is the number of rogue calls sition of both protocols is a (q , q , q(cid:48) , q , T , (cid:15) )-secure DE-
to U in PAKE, then the probability of successful impersonation is S U U D C C
PAKE protocol where (cid:15) = (cid:15) + (3q(cid:48) + 1)(cid:15) + (cid:15) + qU +qS .
at most min{q , q(cid:48) }/2d. This implies that it is insecure for U C Π U P KC 2τ−1
U U
to cache the value retrieved from D for use in multiple sessions - 7DH is not defined over elements outside G hence one needs to
k
doing so allows the above attack without A having to act as a MitM check the input to the oracle - it can be done by an explicit group
between U and D in each DE-PAKE session. membership check or by co-factor exponentiation.
184

===== PAGE 9 =====
5. INSTANTIATIONS AND EXTENSIONS existing service is required. We refer to this mechanism as Server-
In this section, we discuss several instantiations and extensions Transparent DE-PAKE.
of our PTR-PAKE scheme showing the practicality and flexibility There are several advantages of this setting: (1) the user can
of our approach. We first present a full and detailed instantiation of simply remember the short nominal pwd but register with a strong
PTR-PAKE that is secure in the PKI-free setting and which we use high-entropy password that significantly increases resistance to on-
as the basis for our implementation and evaluation work reported line and offline guessing attacks (in particular, offline-only attacks
in Section 6. Then, we show how to provide transparent DE-PAKE on a compromised server are not possible); (2) nominal password
support to currently deployed web services, namely, armoring an pwd can be the same or reused among multiple services, but the
existing service against online and offline attacks without chang- OPRF key associated with each service stored on the device can
ing the server. Finally, we comment on extensions that provide be different (hence also rwd would be different), and therefore the
defenses against client-side and phishing attacks. compromise of the password rwd at one server will not reveal the
actual password pwd and will not compromise the user’s accounts
PKI-Free DE-PAKE. Figure 3 describes a full instantiation of with other services; (3) rather than asking the user to frequently
a PKI-free PTR-PAKE protocol using the FK-PTR scheme from change the password and memorize the updated password, only the
Figure 2 and a PKI-free PAKE protocol with resistance against key on the device can be changed, which improves the usability.
wKCI attacks adapted from the threshold PAKE (TPAKE) proto- We are currently studying the application of this server-transparent
col of [22, 23]. More precisely, the PAKE protocol we use is an FK-PTR-PAKE scheme to building a secure password manager.
adaptation of the variant of the TPAKE protocol from [22, 23] with
resistance against wKCI attacks, proven secure in the PKI-free (or Resisting Client-Side & Phishing Attacks. Malicious code and
CRS) model, to the single-server case (i.e., a (1,1)-TPAKE). keyloggers remain a threat to browsers in spite of browser secu-
The protocol as described in Figure 3 also requires a key-exchange rity enhancements. Because we use a keyed password hardening
mechanism (the “KE formula") to set a session key between server scheme, an attacker who learns pwd by a key-logger or shoulder
and user (in particular for the sake of mutual authentication). Dif- surfing can not authenticate to the service without interacting with
ferent protocols can be used here, for example, based on shared the device. However, an attacker who compromises a client termi-
keys or public keys, with or without forward secrecy, etc. However, nal can obtain rwd. By using service-specific keys at the device
we note that in order to achieve security against server compromise we guarantee that an attacker who obtains rwd can only compro-
(needed to provide the maximal security of a PTR-PAKE scheme) mise the particular service associated with it; even if pwd is used
one must use a public key mechanism. Otherwise, the server would for multiple services, the rwd values derived for each service are
be storing a secret authentication key for the user which would al- random and independent .
low an attacker to impersonate the user to the server in case of Still, one can reduce the threat of the malware attack to the by
server compromise. Thus, while we allow for different key ex- combining our scheme with the traditional two-factor authentica-
change mechanisms through a general KE formula, we do require tion (TFA) mechanism, i.e., having D generate a PRF on a time
these to be based on public keys for both parties (we also accom- value or a nonce under a key that D shares with S. Note that in
modate ephemeral keys if forward secrecy is desired). For illus- a traditional TFA mechanism, compromising the client allows the
tration, and as a concrete and efficient instantiation that preserves attacker to hijack the current login session of the user, but does not
a minimal number of messages and provides forward secrecy, we allow the attacker to login in future sessions (due to the use of “one-
define the key computation formulas corresponding to the HMQV time” PIN codes). Integrating our DE-PAKE protocol with tradi-
protocol [27], where e = H(X , S), e = H(X , U): tional TFA could provide the same level of security in the event of
u u s s
client compromise, while providing all the other security properties
For S: K = KE(p , x , P , X ) = H (cid:0) (X P eu)xs+esps (cid:1) of our DE-PAKE scheme.
s s u u u u
For U: K = KE(p , x , P , X ) = H (cid:0) (X P es)xu+eupu (cid:1) Resistance to phishing attacks can be achieved if rwd is com-
u u S S s s puted on a concatenatation of pwd and the URL being accessed,
The user attempts to log-in to a web service (S) from a browser i.e., if rwd = F Kd (pwd|url). This is similar to the PwdHash ap-
running at the client (U), using her smartphone (D) to map her proach [28] except that in PwdHash, the attacker that obtains the
password pwd to a random rwd. S and U run an instantiation of randomized password through phishing can mount a dictionary at-
PAKE protocol on input rwd to authenticate the user. Although the tack to find the user’s password while in our case this is not feasible.
scheme can be extended to other devices with same capabilities as
smartphones, we targeted latter as the most common device. 6. DEVELOPMENT AND EVALUATION
Server-Transparent DE-PAKE. An important implication of the We evaluate the feasibility and performance of our DE-PAKE
modularity of our PTR-PAKE scheme is that the user can use any scheme, we pursue a proof of concept system development and
secure PTR protocol to derive a hardened password rwd from her evaluation of protocol FK-PTR-PAKE described in Figure 3. The
nominal password pwd, and then register rwd as her actual pass- FK-PTR-PAKE protocol implements a secure DE-PAKE solution
word with an existing server, where the latter implements any wKCI- with full resilience to online and offline attacks, and without re-
resistant password authentication protocol. Since the password au- liance on PKI (except for initialization).
thentication protocol is independent of the hardening procedure, it
6.1 FK-PTR-PAKE System Design
can be the standard password-over-TLS protocol used in the de-
facto standard PKI setting. (Note that if the server stores a salted We implemented parties S, D, U as follows: S is a web-server
password hash then the password-over-TLS authentication is wKCI- hosted on a Debian 7.6 server running PHP 5.4.4; D is an LG G3
resistant.) In such case the login phase of the PTR-PAKE protocol Verizon VS985 Android 5.1 phone running our Java code devel-
consists of the user typing her password pwd, the client terminal oped for Android API 22; and U logs in from a client running
and the device executing the PTR protocol to compute the hard- Google Chrome 40.0 browser on a MacBook Air laptop with a 1.3
ened password rwd, and the client terminal sending rwd to the GHz Intel Core i5 and 4GB memory. At the client side, all com-
server over a TLS session. In this setting, no modification to an putations are performed in our Chrome app. At the device side,
185

===== PAGE 10 =====
Parties: User U, Device D, Server S.
Public Parameters and Components
• Group G of prime order q with generator g.
• Hash functions H, H(cid:48) with ranges {0, 1}2τ , G and Zq, respectively, for τ a security parameter.
• Pseudorandom function (PRF) f with range {0, 1}2τ .
• OPRF function F k (x) = H(x, (H(cid:48)(x))k) for key k ∈ Zq.
• Key exchange formula KE: on input long-term and ephemeral private-public keys outputs shared key K ∈ {0, 1}τ .
Initialization Phase (assumed to be executed over secure links)
• FK-PTR Initialization: Run FK-PTR initialization of Fig. 2 to choose pwd, device’s OPRF key k d, and compute rwd = F kd (pwd).
• PAKE Initialization:
1. S chooses ps ∈
R
Zq and sends to U the public key Ps = gps (Ps can be used with all of S’s users).
2. U chooses z ∈
R
{0, 1}τ , ks ∈
R
Zq;
s c e o t m s p v u al t u es es P c u = = z g ⊕ pu F a k n s d (r m w u d) = , r fz = (2 f , z P ( u 0) , , P C s); = an H d ( s r e , n r d w s d to , c S ), th p e u va = lue f s z c (1 , ) C m , o k d s, q P ; u, mu.
3. S stores c, C, ks, Pu, mu in its U-associated storage (if Ps is user-specific, it also stores Ps and ps).
Login Phase
• User-Device Interaction (FK-PTR)
Follows the FK-PTR protocol as per Fig. 2 to obtain rwd on input pwd from U and input k d from D.
• User-Server Interaction (PAKE)
1. U chooses ρ, xu ← Zq; initiates a key exchange session with S by sending its identity U, the value
α = (H(cid:48)(rwd))ρ and Xu = gxu.
2. S proceeds as follows:
(a) Checks that α ∈ G;
(b) Retrieves (c, C, ks, Pu, mu) from its U-associated storage;
(c) Picks xs ∈
R
Zq and computes β = αks, Xs = gxs.
(d) Sends to U: β, c, C, Pu, mu, Ps, Xs.
(e) Computes K = KE(ps, xs, Pu, Xu) and outputs session key SK = fK(0).
3. U proceeds as follows:
(a) Sets z = c ⊕ H(rwd, β1/ρ), r = fz(0), pu = fz(1) mod q.
(b) Aborts unless the following conditions hold: β ∈ G, C = H(r, rwd, c), mu = fz(2, Pu, Ps).
(c) Computes K = KE(pu, xu, Ps, Xs) and outputs session key SK = fK(0).
• Explicit Authentication
If explicit authentication of the parties is required then S adds the value fK(1) to its message and U adds a third message with value
fK(2). Each party verifies the value received from the other party.
Figure 3: Instantiation of FK-PTR-PAKE with PKI-free PAKE protocol from [22, 23]
all computation is performed by our Android app. The server uses coordinate of a point on the curve only if a y value associated with
a Java communication application to run the single-server PAKE it is a quadratic residue (i.e., x and y satisfy the curve equation).
of [22] (see Figure 3) and PHP scripts to authenticate the user. Otherwise, the same computation is repeated in the next iteration
While client U and server S communicate over the Internet, the until a curve element is obtained8. Such a point on the curve is the
device-client (U−D) communication depends on the features of the output of the hash function H(cid:48). The other hash function in our im-
device. Our implementation allows D to communicate either via plementation, denoted by H, is a SHA256 hash function. The PRF
the cellular data network or the WiFi internet, but if such channels f used in computing r, p , and m in Figure 3 is implemented
u u
are unavailable, e.g. because device D looses cellular data and/or using HMAC-SHA256 with τ -bit keys and τ -bit outputs.
WiFi internet coverage, we allow for a fall-back to a localized
device-client channel, which in our current implementation is re-
OPRF Function: OPRF is defined as F (x) = H(x, (H(cid:48)(x))k)
alized by an ad hoc WiFi connection between U and D. k
with input x from the client and k from the server/device [22]. The
OPRF works over group G of prime order p, which in our imple-
Hash Functions: The modular structure of the the DE-PAKE pro- mentation is an elliptic curve NIST P-256 group.
tocol gives us the flexibility to pick any hash function in the imple-
mentation. The “Hash onto Elliptic Curve” function, denoted by
H(cid:48), maps an arbitrary-length string into an element of the group
8We note that the number of iterations in this hunt-and-peck pro-
G of prime order q; in our implementation G is an elliptic curve
cedure (as used in our prototype) can leak information on the pass-
NIST P-256 group. In this hashing function, SHA-256 of the input word. A safer approach is to use a curve such as 25519 with the El-
(concatenated with the iteration number) is computed and truncated ligator 2 hashing technique [11] which provides better side-channel
into an element in Z , the computed value is considered as the x protection and better performance.
q
186

===== PAGE 11 =====
Table 2: Performance Analysis of the FK-PTR-PAKE Protocol; mean (standard deviation) of delay is reported in milliseconds; The interaction of the user
with the system is exuded from this evaluation. The primary D − U channel implementation is over Cellular Data (12Mbps 4G LTE).
Device Client Server S − U Channel D − U Channel Total
PTR 183.30 (0.02) 45.37 (1.20) – – 36.81 (0.10) (4G LTE) 265.48ms
PAKE – 195.05 (0.03) 27.85 (0.00) 26.76 (2.45) – 249.66ms
Overall Time 515.14ms
WiFi Internet
# of EC Exponentiations 1 7 4 48.09 (0.23)
(10 Mbps)
Localized WiFi
Single EC Exponentiation Cost 167.41(0.03) 10.65 (0.02) 1.39 (0.00) 7.42 (0.01)
(54 Mbps)
Key Computation: The Key Computation function, KE, is from connectivity (cellular data or WiFi), which can serve as an effective
the HMQV protocol [27] described in Section 5 and is computed at device-client communication channel. In addition to performance
the client’s Chrome application and the server application. and bandwidth, such channels have the advantage that the user does
Commitment: During initialization, commitment C is computed not need to be involved in the channel set-up phase (unlike, for
as H(r, rwd, c) at the client side, and is sent to the server to be example, a Bluetooth channel that requires device pairing by the
stored at the server. During authentication, the server sends back C, user). Although such channels are not cost-free (especially cellular
which is compared against H(r, rwd, c) to verify that the computed data), currently most of the carriers offer unlimited text/voice/data
values at the client are valid. The client aborts the protocol if the plan with as less as $25 per month on some of the plans. With these
commitment is not verified. type of plans, we believe that device-client channels may not im-
pose additional cost for the user. At home or at work, for example,
Message Authentication Code: m is the message authentica-
u users often have WiFi Internet connectivity available.
tion code that is sent to the server from the client during initializa-
Due to the above advantages our implementation is based on a
tion, and is stored at the server. During the authentication phase,
device-client “data channel”. On occasions this channel becomes
the server sends m back to the client, which is compared against
u unavailable, e.g., when the user loses network coverage, our imple-
f (2, P , P ) at the client side. If the two do not match, it means
z u s mentation allows fall-back to the localized wireless ad-hoc chan-
the received m is not the same as the one sent to the server dur-
u nels at the cost of reduced usability, since some user effort is re-
ing the initialization and therefore the client aborts the protocol,
quired for establishing localized channels. Assuming such a fall-
otherwise the received public key P is valid (i.e., the server is le-
s back is not required frequently, this “hybrid model” of device-client
gitimate) and client can continue running the protocol.
communication may provide a high level of usability. (For other
Chrome Extension: We developed a Chrome JavaScript applica- case studies using localized WiFi channel see e.g. [14, 29].)
tion to implement user U on a client browser. The user needs to run
this application during the initialization and authentication phases
6.2 Performance Evaluation
(if not already running). This application interacts with D to recon-
struct rwd, and with S to construct K and session key SK, and to
The overall execution time of FK-PTR-PAKE implementations
authenticate U to S. For all Elliptic Curve computations, we used
is evaluated over 10, 000 iterations, and the averaged results are
the Stanford EC library, and for SHA-256 and OPRF functions,
reported in Table 2 in settings described in the previous subsection.
we used CryptoJS APIs. We used Stanford JSBN and JSBN2 li-
The communication between U and S is timed over the Inter-
braries for all BigInteger computations on the Chrome App. We
net (web server and client with 10Mbps Internet connection), but
used Chrome.socket API to send and receive data between U and
the communication between U and D is tested in three different
D in the PTR protocol, and between U and S in the PAKE protocol.
settings: (1) The primary setting is when the communication chan-
Server Application: Server side PHP scripts are the initial and last nel between D and the internet is a Cellular Data link, which in our
point of interaction with the user. Moreover, the application on the tests was a 12Mbps Verizon 4G LTE link; (2) The second setting we
server-side is responsible for storing user specific information, and tested is when D has a WiFi Internet connection (10Mbps), which
participating in the PAKE protocol to authenticate the user. We is another popular Internet connection setting for mobile devices,
developed a Java program using native Java Socket, Java Security commonly used as an alternative to cellular data communication;
and Bouncy Castle libraries to run the PAKE protocol. (3) Finally, we timed the protocol in the Localized WiFi setting,
namely a point-to-point 54Mbps wireless device-client link (ad hoc
Device Application: The Android app running on the device is WiFi) established between U and D. As we argued in the previous
responsible for storing OPRF k d , receiving α = (H(cid:48)(pwd))ρ from subsection, the localized WiFi channel is an important fall-back op-
the client, checking the group membership of α, and sending β = tion in case the other two channels are unavailable. Table 2 shows
αkd to the client. Although this application can theoretically run overall costs for setting (1), but at the bottom of the right-most col-
on the device without any interaction with the user, we require the umn we show the D-U channel delay in settings (2) and (3).
user to confirm the transfer of β. The user needs to launch the Based on our evaluation, for all parties, the most costly computa-
application (if not already running) and wait for the app to prompt tion is Elliptic Curve (EC) exponentiation (10.65ms on the Chrome
for the consent. Then, she can approve the communication, to let app, 167.41ms on the Android app, and 1.39ms on the server with
the device send β to the client. This design choice is made to ensure the mentioned libraries). In one round of the protocol with dif-
that the device does not respond to unauthorized requests (without ferent device-client links, the most costly communication is around
user’s awareness). All elliptic curve functions in our app are based 50ms between the client and the device over 10Mbps WiFi Internet.
on Java Security and Spongy Castle on Android 5.1. The overall execution time of FK-PTR-PAKE protocol, excluding
Device-Client Communication. Since the device-client communi- the manual task of password entry, is around 515ms, which seems
cation in our scheme does not require to be confidential or authen- reasonably efficient. On an average, the PTR part of the protocol
ticated (i.e., does not need to be protected), we can use any channel takes around 265ms to complete (with the major delay due to com-
to run the protocol. Today, almost all smartphones have Internet putation on the device), and the PAKE part of the protocol takes
187

===== PAGE 12 =====
249ms to complete (with the major delay due to computation on [8] T. Acar, M. Belenkiy, and A. Kupcu. Single password authentication.
the client). Since the major computation is performed by the client Computer Networks, 57(13):2597 – 2614, 2013.
due to EC exponentiations (total number of 7 Exponentiation, 2 in [9] M. Bellare, C. Namprempre, D. Pointcheval, and M. Semanko. The
PTR and 5 in PAKE protocol), optimizing the exponentiation code one-more-RSA-inversion problems and the security of Chaum’s
blind signature scheme. 16(3):185–215, June 2003.
at the client might help to further improve the performance. Also,
[10] M. Bellare, D. Pointcheval, and P. Rogaway. Authenticated key
one can reduce the number of exponentiations for both server and
exchange secure against dictionary attacks. In Advances in
user by almost one exponentiation by implementing the HMQV Cryptology – Eurocrypt, 2000.
computation via a multi-exponentiation technique. [11] D. J. Bernstein, M. Hamburg, A. Krasnova, and T. Lange. Elligator:
Communication delays are a smaller component of the overall elliptic-curve points indistinguishable from uniform random strings.
cost, hence the choice of a particular D − U channel does not sig- pages 967–980, 2013.
nificanly affect the overall performance: Using WiFi Internet in- [12] S. Blake-Wilson, D. Johnson, and A. Menezes. Key agreement
stead of Cellular Data adds 11.28ms, causing only a 2% increase in protocols and their security analysis. In Proceedings of the 6th IMA
International Conference on Cryptography and Coding, pages
the overall time, while using Localized WiFi cuts 29.39ms, a 6%
30–45, London, UK, UK, 1997. Springer-Verlag.
speed-up in the overall time.
[13] X. Boyen. Hidden credential retrieval from a reusable password. In
Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Information,
7. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Computer, and Communications Security, ASIACCS ’09, pages
In this paper, we considered the problem of armoring password 228–238, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM.
protocols against online guessing attacks as well as offline dic- [14] A. Czeskis, M. Dietz, T. Kohno, D. Wallach, and D. Balfanz.
tionary attacks in the event of server or device compromise. We Strengthening user authentication through opportunistic
cryptographic identity assertions. In Proceedings of ACM conference
proposed a novel, efficient and modular device-enhanced password
on Computer and communications security. ACM, 2012.
protocol (DE-PAKE) and formally analyzed its security. In con-
[15] I. Dacosta, M. Ahamad, and P. Traynor. Trust no one else: Detecting
trast to previous work on this subject, our protocol does not re- MITM attacks against SSL/TLS without third-parties. In European
quire the presence of a public key infrastructure or the availability Symposium on Research in Computer Security, 2012.
of authenticated public keys (except, possibly, for initial password [16] A. Everspaugh, R. Chaterjee, S. Scott, A. Juels, and T. Ristenpart.
registration) thus relaxing the concerns regarding PKI failures or The pythia prf service. In 24th USENIX Security Symposium
compromises. At the same time, when an authentic and uncom- (USENIX Security 15), 2015.
promised public key of the server is available, our protocol further [17] W. Ford and B. S. Kaliski Jr. Server-assisted generation of a strong
secret from a password. In Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for
guarantees resilience to server impersonation even when the user’s
Collaborative Enterprises, 2000.
password is disclosed. Remarkably, we can achieve these benefits
[18] M. J. Freedman, Y. Ishai, B. Pinkas, and O. Reingold. Keyword
without necessitating service-side changes. search and oblivious pseudorandom functions. In Theory of
Finally, we note that, thanks to our modular architecture, one Cryptography. 2005.
can further increase the resistance to server compromise by using [19] C. Gentry, P. MacKenzie, and Z. Ramzan. A method for making
a threshold-PAKE protocol (e.g., [22]), in which case an attacker password-based key exchange resilient to server compromise. In
needs to compromise a threshold of servers in addition to the device Advances in Cryptology-CRYPTO. 2006.
before being able to mount an offline dictionary attack. [20] M. Georgiev, S. Iyengar, S. Jana, R. Anubhai, D. Boneh, and
V. Shmatikov. The most dangerous code in the world: Validating ssl
We demonstrate practical viability of our solution by building a
certificates in non-browser software. In Proceedings of the ACM
DE-PAKE system based on a concrete instantiations of our protocol
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2012.
(with and without server-side changes), utilizing an automated data [21] D. P. Jablon. Password authentication using multiple servers. In The
channel between the device and the client (falling back to localized Cryptographer’s Track at RSA Conference (CT-RSA). 2001.
WiFi communication only when such a channel is to become un- [22] S. Jarecki, A. Kiayias, and H. Krawczyk. Round-optimal
available). Our performance evaluation demonstrate the promising password-protected secret sharing and T-PAKE in the password-only
feasibility of our schemes, although a systematic investigation of model. In Advances in Cryptology–ASIACRYPT. 2014.
their overall usability is left for future work. [23] S. Jarecki, A. Kiayias, H. Krawczyk, and J. Xu. Highly Efficient and
Composable Password-Protected Secret Sharing. In 1st IEEE
European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P). 2015.
Acknowledgments
[24] S. Jarecki, H. Krawczyk, M. Shirvanian, and N. Saxena.
Device-enhanced password protocols with optimal online-offline
This research is partially supported by ONR Contract N00014-14-
protection. IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive: Report 2015/1099
C-0113, NSF CICI Award #1547435 and #1547350, and NSF CNS
available at http://eprint.iacr.org/2015/1099, December 2015.
Award #1209280. [25] S. Jarecki and X. Liu. Efficient oblivious pseudorandom function
with applications to adaptive ot and secure computation of set
8. REFERENCES intersection. In Theory of Cryptography. 2009.
[1] Anonymous hackers claim to leak 28,000 PayPal passwords on [26] S. Jarecki and X. Liu. Fast secure computation of set intersection. In
global protest day. Available at: http://goo.gl/oPv2h. Security and Cryptography for Networks. 2010.
[2] Blizzard servers hacked; emails, hashed passwords stolen. Available [27] H. Krawczyk. Hmqv: A high-performance secure diffie-hellman
at: http://goo.gl/OTNWJC. protocol. In Advances in Cryptology–CRYPTO, 2005.
[3] Hackers compromised nearly 5M Gmail passwords. Available at: [28] B. Ross, C. Jackson, N. Miyake, D. Boneh, and J. C. Mitchell.
http://goo.gl/IRu07u. Stronger password authentication using browser extensions. In
[4] LinkedIn Confirms Account Passwords Hacked. Available at: Usenix security Symposium, 2005.
http://goo.gl/UBWuY0. [29] M. Shirvanian, S. Jarecki, N. Saxena, and N. Nathan. Two-factor
[5] RSA breach leaks data for hacking securid tokens. Available at: authentication resilient to server compromise using mix-bandwidth
http://goo.gl/tcEoS. devices. In Network & Distributed System Security Symposium, 2014.
[6] RSA SecurID software token cloning: a new how-to. Available at: [30] J. Sunshine, S. Egelman, H. Almuhimedi, N. Atri, and L. F. Cranor.
http://goo.gl/qkSFY. Crying wolf: An empirical study of ssl warning effectiveness. In
USENIX Security Symposium, 2009.
[7] Russian Hackers Amass Over a Billion Internet Passwords. Available
at: http://goo.gl/aXzqj8.
188