===== PAGE 1 =====
Device-Enhanced Password Protocols with Optimal Online-Offline
Protection
Stanislaw Jarecki∗ Hugo Krawczyk† Maliheh Shirvanian‡ Nitesh Saxena§
Abstract
We introduce a setting that we call Device-Enhanced PAKE (DE-PAKE), where PAKE (password-
authenticated key exchange) protocols are strengthened against online and offline attacks through the use
of an auxiliary device that aids the user in the authentication process. We build such schemes and show
that their security, properly formalized, achieves maximal-attainable resistance to online and offline
attacks in both PKI and PKI-free settings. In particular, an online attacker must guess the user’s password
and also control the user’s auxiliary device to authenticate, while an attacker who corrupts the server
cannot learn the users’ passwords via an offline dictionary attack. Notably, our solutions do not require
secure channels, and nothing (in an information-theoretic sense) is learned about the password by the
device (or a malicious software running on the device) or over the device-client channel, even without any
external protection of this channel. An attacker taking over the device still requires a full online attack
to impersonate the user. Importantly, our DE-PAKE scheme can be deployed at the user end without the
need to modify the server and without the server having to be aware that the user is using a DE-PAKE
scheme. In particular, the schemes can work with standard servers running the usual password-over-TLS
authentication.
1 Introduction
Today, passwords constitute the prevalent authentication mechanism for bootstrapping security in most on-
line applications (and many offline systems). A plethora of sensitive information stored in many differ-
ent contexts therefore depends on the security of password-based authentication. However, passwords are
vulnerable to both online and offline dictionary attacks that build on password dictionaries from which a
significant portion of passwords are chosen. Candidate passwords for authenticating a user to a server can
be tested by an attacker through online interactions with the server. Furthermore, an attacker breaking into
a server can mount an offline attack that uses information stored on the server (typically, a salted one-way
mapping of the password) to test the different passwords in the dictionary. Such offline dictionary attacks are
a serious concern, especially in light of frequent attacks against major commercial vendors recently, such as
PayPal [1], LinkedIn [4], Blizzard [2] and Gmail [3]. The offline attacks are particularly devastating because
a single server break-in may lead to compromising a huge number of user accounts [7]. Furthermore, since
many users re-use their passwords across multiple services, compromising one service may compromise
user accounts at other services.
∗U. California Irvine. Email: stasio@ics.uci.edu.
†IBM Research. Email: hugo@ee.technion.ac.il. Research supported by ONR Contract N00014-14-C-0113.
‡U. Alabama Birmingham. Email: maliheh@uab.edu
§U. Alabama Birmingham. Email: saxena@cis.uab.edu
1

===== PAGE 2 =====
In this paper, we present solutions directed to enhance password protocols against both online and offline
attacks by an active man-in-the-middle attacker acting on both user-server and user-device links, and capable
of compromising devices and servers by learning their full internal state (e.g., a server’s password file or the
device’s secrets).
1.1 Our Contributions
We introduce a setting that we call Device-Enhanced PAKE (DE-PAKE), where PAKE (password-authenticated
key exchange) protocols are strengthened against online and offline attacks through the use of an auxiliary
device that aids the user in the authentication process. We build such schemes and show that their security,
properly formalized, achieves maximal-attainable resistance to online and offline attacks in both PKI and
PKI-free1 settings. Moreover, our DE-PAKE scheme can be deployed at the user end without the need to
modify the server and without the server having to be aware that the user is using a DE-PAKE scheme. In
particular, in the PKI setting the scheme can work with unmodified servers running the usual password-over-
TLS authentication.
We introduce efficient DE-PAKE protocols with the following properties:
1. Resistance to online and offline attacks: Our DE-PAKE schemes provide maximal-attainable security
in terms of resistance to both online and offline attacks. That is, the only attack allowed by the scheme
is the unavoidable online guessing attack where the attacker tests if a given value p is the user U’s
password by interacting with both device and server in the role of U with password p and observing
whether the server accepts. In other words, each guess attempt requires the attacker to interact on both
U-D and U-S links. No amount of attacking on one link helps without a corresponding attack on the
other. Moreover, fully compromising the device still requires a full online guessing attack on the U-S
link and fully compromising the server requires a full online guessing attack on the U-D link. And
even if both S and D are compromised, a full offline dictionary attack is required. More formally, to
have an impersonation probability of q/|Dict|, where Dict is the passwords dictionary, the attacker
needs to run q online interactions with D and q online interactions with S. Moreover, even when
compromising the device and finding all its secrets, the attacker still needs to run q online interactions
with S, and if the server is compromised, q online interactions with D are necessary. Finally, if both
device and server are compromised the adversary must stage a full offline dictionary attack to learn
any passwords. We formalize these properties through a security model that extends the traditional
PAKE security setting, and then we use this model to prove the security of our schemes.
2. PKI-agnostic: The above security is achieved even when the user-server channel is not protected by
a server public key. On the other hand, when such protection is available one obtains the additional
benefit that impersonating the server to the user is infeasible even if the user’s password is disclosed.
Luckily, our schemes can work, without modification and without having to be aware of it, with PKI-
based and PKI-free authentication protocols, providing in each case the best possible offline-online
protection.
1We stress that PKI-freeness in password protocols refers to dispensing of PKI for user authentication but some form of secure
channel is needed for password registration. Note that the latter process, being much less frequent than regular login, can use special
safeguards, such as real-world physical interactions or out-of-band channels.
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
3. Modularity and server-transparency: Our design is modular allowing for the use of independent
device and server components, in particular enabling the use of our scheme with existing password
protocols and without the need to modify the server side. See Section 5.2.
1.2 Relevance to Work on Two-Factor Authentication
One important and increasingly common line of defense against password attacks is the use of two-factor
password authentication (TFA) schemes. TFA mechanisms are used for authenticating a user U to a server
S, and establishing a session key between the two, where the user has a password and a personal device
D (e.g., a smartphone) that contains some secret auxiliary information. This secret information is used to
increase the security of password authentication by preventing online attacks for an adversary that does not
have access to D. Typically, D displays a short one-time PIN (OTP), received directly from the server or
computed by D based on a key shared with the server, that the user manually copies over to the authentication
terminal in addition to providing her password.
Traditionally, these TFA schemes have been used for increasing resistance to online dictionary attacks.
However, as correctly argued by Shirvanian et al. [26], with the increasing vulnerabilities of servers to
compromise [5, 6], TFA schemes should also be enhanced to strengthen security against offline attacks.
This work [26] presented several schemes for achieving this goal. The main idea underlying all their TFA
protocols is for the server to store a randomized hash of the password, h = H(p, s), and for the device
to store the corresponding random secret s. The authentication protocol checks whether the user types the
correct password p and also that it can access the device that stores s.
There are, however, two important aspects in which the schemes of [26] can be improved, and we do so
in this paper. First, all their schemes assume a PKI setting, namely, the user (through a client application)
must be in possession of an authentic public key of the server which is used to establish a secure channel,
e.g., via TLS. If such public key is not available or is compromised, the security of the scheme completely
breaks down. Given the vulnerabilities of PKI to certification failures and man-in-the-middle (MitM) attacks
(either due to programmatic errors or human mistakes), e.g., [11,16,27], reducing the dependency of authen-
tication security on public keys is an increasingly important goal. Second, the schemes of [26] require the
authentication server to run a different protocol than currently standard PKI-setting TFA schemes which can
inhibit the deployment of such schemes. For example, an individual user (or an application) cannot adopt
the schemes from [26] to protect her password stored by a web service without that service being modified
to support the new TFA method.
The notion of DE-PAKE scheme we propose (and its efficient realization we construct) addresses many
of the same concerns as TFA schemes, e.g. increased security against on-line attacks viz-a-viz solely-
password based authentication, and it surpasses security offered by existing TFA schemes by offering max-
imal resistance to off-line attacks, i.e. making offline dictionary search impossible in case of server com-
promise. However, traditional TFA schemes offer also increased security against compromise of the client
machine (compared to solely-password authentication). A generic DE-PAKE scheme does not provide this,
although the specific DE-PAKE scheme we propose can be extended to offer additional defenses against
attacks on the client (see Section 5.3). Moreover, it is possible to combine a DE-PAKE scheme with a tra-
ditional MFA mechanism (e.g. a one-time PIN delivered to or generated by the hand-held device) to extend
the security properties of DE-PAKE to include the same level of resistance against client compromise as
offered by traditional TFA schemes.
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
Table 1: Glossary
Acronym Description
Password-authenticated key exchange. We refer to password protocols by PAKE as well as to
PAKE
their security model (recalled in Section 3.1).
A PAKE protocol that does not assume any secret or authenticated key carried by the user other
PKI-Free PAKE than its own password. In particular, no PKI-based server-authentication is assumed.
This is also known as the CRS or password-only model.
A new notion of Device-Enhanced PAKE protocols that guarantees optimal resilience to offline and
DE-PAKE online attacks upon compromise of device and/or server. We use DE-PAKE to refer to the security
model (Section 3.2) as well as to the constructions satisfying this model (Sections 4 and 5) .
A security notion and model for password hardening protocols. We use PTR (password-to-random) to
PTR
refer to the security model (Section 4.2) as well as to the constructions satisfying this model (Section 4.1).
A specific construction of a PTR scheme using the Ford-Kaliski password hardening technique
FK-PTR
(Section 4.1).
Oblivious PRF (see Section 4.1) is the basis for the FK-PTR protocol.
OPRF
When implemented via the function F (x) = H(x, (H(cid:48)(x))k) we obtain FK-PTR.
k
A general name for DE-PAKE protocols built by composing a PTR and a PAKE protocols
PTR-PAKE
(their generic security is based on Theorem 3)
A PTR-PAKE scheme where the PTR part is implemented with the FK-PTR construction. It is also the
FK-PTR-PAKE
name of the protocol in Fig 3 that combines FK-PTR with the PKI-free PAKE protocol of [18, 20].
1.3 Organization and Glossary
We present an overview of our design and proof methodology in Section 2 with full details given in Section 4.
Section 3 presents the formal DE-PAKE security model on which we base our analysis. Section 5 presents
protocol instantiations and extensions: A fully specified DE-PAKE scheme secure in the PKI-free (or CRS)
model; a description of our approach for armoring existing servers against online and offline attacks while
keeping the servers unmodified; and a discussion of extensions to address issues related to client security
(not covered in our DE-PAKE model). We close with conclusions and future directions.
In Table 1 we provide for easy reference a summary of the main terms (and corresponding acronyms)
introduced and used throughout the paper.
2 Overview: DE-PAKE Design and Analysis
Our design follows the “password hardening” approach of Ford and Kaliski [13], but dispenses of authen-
ticated channels (other than during a registration phase), multiple servers and/or other safeguards that were
required for the secure use of these techniques in prior work [13, 17].
The idea is simple: the user memorizes a regular password pwd but uses as her password with server
S a value rwd = F (pwd) where F is a pseudorandom function and k is a key held by device D (rwd
k
is a mnemonics for “randomized password”). Before authenticating to S, U contacts D (through a client
application) and obtains rwd via a special protocol with D (in which D learns nothing about pwd or rwd!).
U then authenticates to S via a (standard) PAKE protocol using rwd as a password. Note that without
knowledge of k, the value rwd has full entropy (i.e., it is indistinguishable from uniform in the range set of
function F ), hence dictionary attacks do not apply against rwd (neither online or offline attacks, not even if
the server is compromised). Moreover, we will ensure that even if D (or S) is compromised, offline attacks
against pwd are infeasible. Thus, the challenge is in implementing the protocol between U and D, to which
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
we refer as PTR (for Password-to-Random), so that U can compute F (pwd) but the protocol leaks no other
k
information about protocol inputs, i.e. pwd and k. Note that we cannot assume an authenticated or secret
channel between the client and D since this would either require knowing a device public key or storing
pwd-related information at D (the latter would open pwd to an offline dictionary attack upon compromising
D). We show that in spite of the client-device link being unauthenticated, hence controlled by the attacker,
the “blinded DH” approach of Ford-Kaliski, (see Section 4.1), can be used to implement the PTR protocol.
1. k 1. pwd 3. rwd 3. σ (U)
d s
PTR PAKE
2. rwd = F (pwd)
kd 4. K
input
output
Figure 1: PTR-PAKE Authentication Phase
Hence, we obtain a DE-PAKE scheme, which we call PTR-PAKE, as the composition of a PTR protocol
and a secure PAKE. We depict this generic construction of a DE-PAKE protocol in Figure 1. The output K
in step 4 denotes the session key established between the user and the server, i.e. the output of the DE-PAKE
protocol, which is equal to the output of the PAKE subprotocol. The server’s input σ (U) to the PAKE
S
subprotocol denotes the user-specific information stored at S created in the PAKE initialization using rwd in
the role of the password (e.g. in a common PKI-based PAKE σ (U) would be a salted hash of rwd).
S
In order to prove the security of such scheme, we first extend (Section 3) the established security models
for the PAKE functionality to the DE-PAKE setting. For the DE-PAKE modeling we consider a fully
capable man-in-the-middle attacker active on all the links between all parties and one who is allowed to
compromise servers and devices at will. No external source of authentication is assumed other than the
user’s password (except for secure registration of a user with the server and device). Second, we define
the security requirements from a PTR protocol and show a PTR instantiation, FK-PTR, that satisfies this
definition in the random oracle model. Finally, we prove a generic security composition theorem showing
that the composition of a secure PTR scheme (run between U and D on the basis of the user’s password pwd)
with a secure PAKE protocol (run between U and S on the basis of the hardened password rwd = F (pwd))
k
results in a secure DE-PAKE scheme, provided that the PAKE protocol satisfies “security against server
compromise” or the more precise notion of wKCI resistance introduced and discussed in Section 3.1.1 (we
note that typical protocols that store a salted version of the password satisfy this property).
Since our FK-PTR scheme does not require PKI, using a PKI-free PAKE in the above composition
results in a DE-PAKE protocol that does not rely on public keys or other secure channels.
In order to demonstrate full standalone solutions, in Section 5 we describe two instantiations of our PTR-
PAKE construction of a DE-PAKE scheme. In Section 5.1 we compose our FK-PTR scheme with a specific
PAKE protocol - a wKCI-resistant version of the single-server variant of threshold PAKE from [18, 20].
Since this PAKE protocol does not require PKI, neither does the resulting DE-PAKE protocol. In addition,
in Section 5.2 we expand on the fact that since our PTR-PAKE construction can be used with any existing
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
password protocol with resistance to wKCI attacks, one obtains DE-PAKE schemes without changing the
server that implements the PAKE protocol.2 In particular, this allows to use without any change any server
that implements the standard PKI-based password-over-TLS protocol.
A PTR scheme is a close variant of OPRF, and the potential of OPRF to strengthen password authentica-
tion was recently and independently used in the Pythia system [12], but their proposal differs from ours in at
least three ways: (1) Their OPRF scheme is significantly more costly than our PTR: it requires 6 exponenti-
ations and a bilinear map compared to 3 exponentiations in our PTR scheme (and we can use elliptic curves
without bilinear maps where exponentiations are cheaper); (2) their solution relies on PKI, while ours does
not; (3) their solution does not offer a server-transparent instantiation.
3 Security Model
We introduce the Device-Enhanced PAKE (DE-PAKE) security model under which we prove the security of
our schemes. The model extends the standard PAKE (Password Authenticated Key Exchange) formalisms to
include user-specific devices and formulates a security definition that guarantees maximal online and offline
security of password protocols.
We start by recalling the PAKE security model (adapted to the client-server setting) and then we present
the extension of the PAKE model to the DE-PAKE setting.
3.1 PAKE Security Model
We recall the security model for PAKE (Password-based Authenticated Key Exchange) protocols based
on the model of Bellare, Pointcheval and Rogaway [9] that extends authenticated key exchange models to
account for the inherent vulnerability of password protocols to online guessing attacks. We adapt the model
to the client-server setting borrowing some of the formalism from [18] (we refer to the client as the “user”).
In Section 3.1.1 we describe an extension of the PAKE model to security against server compromise.
Protocol participants. There are two types of parties participating in a PAKE protocol, users and servers.
Each user U is associated with a unique server S while servers may be associated with multiple users.
Protocol execution. A PAKE protocol has two phases: initialization and key exchange. In the initialization
phase each user U chooses a random password pwd from a given dictionary Dict and interacts with its
associated server S producing a user’s state σ (U) that S stores while U only remembers its password pwd.
S
Initialization is assumed to be executed securely, e.g., over secure channels. In the key exchange phase,
users interact with servers over insecure (adversary-controlled) channels to establish session keys. Both
users and servers may execute the protocol multiple times in a concurrent fashion. Each execution of the
PAKE protocol by U or S defines a (user or server) protocol instance, also referred to as a protocol session,
denoted respectively ΠU or ΠS, where integer pointer i serves to differentiates between multiple protocol
i i
instances executed by the same party. Each protocol session is associated with the following variables: a
session identifier sid, which we equate with the message transcript observed by this instance (where both
U and S order their interaction transcripts starting with U’s message), a peer identity pid, and a session key
sk. For a user instance the peer is always the user’s server while for a server instance the peer is the user
authenticated in the session. The output of an execution consists of the above three variables which can be
set to ⊥ if the party aborts the session (e.g., when authentication fails, a misformed message is received,
etc.). When a session outputs sk (cid:54)=⊥ we say that the session accepts.
2If the PAKE protocol is secure but does not offer wKCI resistance, the resulting scheme does not offer all security properties
of DE-PAKE but it still signficantly improves upon the security of the PAKE protocol.
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
PAKE Security. To define security we consider a probabilistic attacker A which schedules all actions in
the protocol and controls all communication channels with full ability to transport, modify, inject, delay
or drop messages. In addition, the attacker knows (or even chooses) the dictionaries used by users. The
model defines the following queries or activations through which the adversary interacts with, and learns
information from, the protocol’s participants.
send(P, i, P (cid:48), M ): causes message M to be delivered to instance ΠP purportedly coming from P (cid:48). In
i
response to a send query the instance takes the actions specified by the protocol and outputs a message given
to A. When a session accepts, a message indicating acceptance is given to A. A send message with a new
value i (possibly with null M ) creates a new instance at P with pid P (cid:48). For simplicity, we assume that the
pair {P, P (cid:48)} in any send message contains a user and the server associated to that user (a non-compliant
message causes the receiving instance to abort). The send query can also create a new instance of party P :
If ΠU does not exist then query send(U, i, S, init) creates a new instance ΠU which executes with pid = S on
i i
U’s chosen password pwd. Similarly, if ΠS does not exist then send(S, i, U, M ) creates a new instance ΠS
i i
which executes with pid = U on S’s input σ (U), with U’s first message set to M . (This formalism assumes
S
that protocol exchanges are initiated by users, which is the operational setting in PAKE.)
reveal(P, i): If instance ΠP has accepted, outputs the respective session key sk; otherwise outputs ⊥.
i
corrupt(P ): Outputs all data held by party P and A gains full control of P . We say that P is corrupted.
compromise(S, U): Outputs state σ (U) at S. We say that S is U-compromised.
S
test(P, i): If instance ΠP has accepted, this query causes ΠP to flip a random bit b. If b = 1 the
i i
instance’s session key sk is output and if b = 0 a string drawn uniformly from the space of session keys is
output. A test query may be asked at any time during the execution of the protocol, but may only be asked
once. We will refer to the party P against which a test query was issued and to its peer as the target parties.
The following notion taken from [18] is used in the security definition below to ensure that legitimate
messages exchanged between honest parties do not help the attacker in online password guessing attempts
(only adversarially-generated messages count towards such online attacks). It has similar motivation as the
execute query in [9], but the latter fails to capture the ability of the attacker to delay and interleave messages
from different sessions.
Rogue send queries/activations: We say that a send(P, i, P (cid:48), M ) query is rogue if it was not generated
and/or delivered according to the specification of the protocol. That is, the message M has been changed
or injected by the attacker, or the delivery order differs from what is stipulated by the protocol (delaying
message delivery or interleaving messages from different sessions is not considered a rogue operation as
long as internal session ordering is preserved). We also consider as rogue any send(P, i, P (cid:48), M ) query
where P is uncorrupted and P (cid:48) is corrupted. Throughout the paper we will refer to messages delivered
through rogue send queries as rogue activations by A.
Matching sessions. A session in instance ΠP and a session in instance ΠP (cid:48) are said to be matching if both
i j
have the same session identifier sid (i.e., their transcripts match), the first has pid = P (cid:48), the second has
pid = P , and both have accepted.
Fresh sessions. A session at instance ΠP with peer P (cid:48) s.t. {P, P (cid:48)} = {U, S} is called fresh if none of the
i
queries corrupt(U), corrupt(S), compromise(S, U), reveal(P, i) or reveal(P (cid:48), i(cid:48)) were issued, where ΠP (cid:48) is
i(cid:48)
an instance whose session matches ΠP (if such ΠP (cid:48) exists).
i i(cid:48)
Correctness. Matching sessions between uncorrupted peers output the same session key.
Attacker’s advantage. Let PAKE be a PAKE protocol and A be an attacker with the above capabilities running
against PAKE. Assume that A issues a single test query against a fresh session at a user or server and ends
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
its run with an output bit b(cid:48). We say that A wins if b(cid:48) = b where b is the bit chosen internally by the test
session. The advantage of A against PAKE is defined as AdvPAKE = 2 · P r [A wins against PAKE] − 1.
A
Definition 1. A PAKE protocol PAKE is (q S , q U , T, (cid:15))-secure if it is correct and for any password dictionary
Dict and any attacker A that runs in time T , it holds that AdvPAKE ≤ qU +qS + (cid:15) where q is the number of
A |Dict| U
rogue send queries having the target user U as recipient and q is the number of rogue send queries having
S
the target S as recipient.
Dictionary size 2d. For notational convenience, we will use 2d to denote the size of password dictionaries,
although our treatment does not depend on these sizes being a power of 2.
3.1.1 Security against server compromise and KCI-resistance
In the asymmetric client-server setting of password authentication that concerns us in this paper, plain pass-
words should not be stored at the server, so as to prevent the leakage of the password in case of server
compromise. Instead, the server should store some other verification information corresponding to this pass-
word, such as the salted password hash. The security requirement in this case, often referred to as security
against server compromise [15], is that access to the server’s state for a particular user (i.e, U-compromise
in our terminology) does not allow the attacker to authenticate that user to the server except after running an
offline dictionary attack that recovers the password given the server’s state.3 In the key-exchange literature
an attack in which the compromise of a party P allows the attacker to falsely authenticate another party P (cid:48)
to P is called a Key-Compromise Impersonation (KCI) attack [10]. Therefore, the above notion of security
against server compromise can be seen as a weak form of KCI resistance, where impersonation of U to S is
possible but only after running an offline dictionary attack.
Here we extend the above indistinguishability-based PAKE formalism to capture resistance to weak KCI
attacks (wKCI-resistance) through the following game (this formalism is well suited to typical ROM-based
implementations that hash the password). We consider a PAKE setting as before except for the following
changes. A user U (associated with server S) chooses its password at random from a dictionary Dict, where
Dict is a random subset of {0, 1}τ of size 2d (for integers d < τ ). The PAKE attacker A is only given a
random subset of Dict of size q as well as the server’s state σ (U). In addition, A is required, to choose
S
the test session at an instance of S with peer U (in the regular PAKE case this is not allowed since S is
U-compromised). We call a PAKE scheme (cid:15)-wKCI-resistant if for any q ≤ 2d, the attacker’s advantage in
the above game is at most q/2d + (cid:15).
A strong notion of KCI resistance is achieved in the DE-PAKE model as we will see next.
3.2 DE-PAKE Security Model
We extend the PAKE model to the DE-PAKE setting. Besides servers and users in the PAKE model, each
user is associated with a device D with which it communicates over a two-way link. The initialization phase
of PAKE is extended to include the user-device communication that establishes the state stored at D. As
before, users only remember their passwords. As in the PAKE case, initialization (including the user-device
interaction) is assumed to run over secure channels. After initialization, the links between users and devices
are subject to the same man-in-the-middle adversarial activity as in the links between users and servers.
Device instances ΠD are created similarly to user and server instances, and are activated by A via send
i
3Recovering the password via an offline dictionary attack is unavoidable in the PAKE model. Also unavoidable is impersonating
S to U when S is U-compromised (except if one assumes, as in the PKI model, an independent authenticated channel from S to U).
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
queries that include users and devices as senders and receivers. However, device instances do not produce
output other than the outgoing messages. In particular, reveal queries do not apply to them, but corrupt
queries can be issued against devices, in which case the internal state of the device is revealed to A who then
controls the device. The session-related notions, including the test query, do not apply to devices.
The attacker’s goal remains the same as before, namely, win the test experiment at a user or server
instance exactly as in the PAKE setting. Also the correctness property is unchanged. However, to the
attacker resources we add the number of rogue send queries (see Section 3.1) where the target user is the
recipient and the device the sender (denoted q(cid:48) ) and the number of rogue send queries where the target
U
user is the sender and the device the recipient (denoted q ). We refer to this more powerful adversary as a
D
DE-PAKE attacker.
Strong KCI resistance. The DE-PAKE model is intended to provide a much stronger notion of security
in case of server compromise than achievable in the PAKE case. While in the latter, impersonating U to S
in case of U-compromise is possible (and unavoidable) through an offline dictionary attack, in DE-PAKE
protocols this is prohibited. In order to formalize this requirement we follow the treatment of KCI resistance
from [23] and we strengthen the capabilities of a DE-PAKE attacker through a more liberal notion of fresh
sessions at a server S. All sessions considered fresh in the PAKE model are also considered fresh in the
DE-PAKE model; in addition, in the DE-PAKE model, a session ΠS at server S with peer U is considered
i
fresh even if corrupt(S) or compromise(S, U) were issued as long as all other requirements for freshness
are satisfied and the attacker A does not have access to the temporary state information created by session
ΠS. This relaxation of the notion of freshness captures the case where the attacker A might have corrupted
i
S and gained access to S’s secrets (including long-term ones), yet A is not actively controlling S during the
generation of session ΠS. In this case we would still want to prevent A from authenticating as U to S on that
i
session. Definition 2 (item 2) below ensures that this is the case for DE-PAKE secure protocols even when
unbounded offline attacks against S are allowed.
The following security definition captures the maximal-attainable online and offline security from a DE-
PAKE protocol as informally discussed in the introduction. Let DPK be a DE-PAKE protocol and A be an
attacker with the above capabilities running against DPK. As in the PAKE model, we assume that A issues a
single test query against some U or S session, that A output bit b(cid:48), and we say that A wins if b(cid:48) = b where b
is the bit chosen by the test session. We define AdvDPK = 2 · P r [A wins against DPK] − 1.
A
Definition 2. A DE-PAKE protocol is called (q , q , q(cid:48) , q , T, (cid:15))-secure if it is correct, and for any pass-
S U U D
word dictionary Dict of size 2d and any attacker that runs in time T , the following properties hold (for
q , q , q(cid:48) , q as defined above):
S U U D
1. If S and D are uncorrupted, the following bound holds:
min{q + q , q(cid:48) + q }
AdvDPK ≤ U S U D + (cid:15). (1)
A 2d
2. If D is corrupted then AdvDPK ≤ (q + q )/2d + (cid:15).
A U S
3. If S is corrupted then AdvDPK ≤ (q(cid:48) + q )/2d + (cid:15).
A U D
4. When both D and S are corrupted, expression (1) holds but q and q are replaced by the number of
D S
offline operations performed based on D’s and S’s state, respectively.
Note that the bounds in items 3 and 4 hold also when S is U-compromised (since being corrupted implies
U-compromise for all users U associated with S).
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
Note (more general bounds). One could define the above bounds more generally by replacing the expression
min{q + q , q(cid:48) + q }/2d + (cid:15) with some more general function of the q parameters but we choose the
U S U D
simpler and more natural case. Also, note that the expression (1) can be achieved by the adversary via
generic attacks (e.g., q + q is achievable when A plays man-in-the-middle between S and D on a guessed
U S
password, and q(cid:48) + q is achievable when A acts between U and D on the guessed password). Finally, we
U D
note that item 2 (resp. 3) could be covered by (1) if one replaced q (resp. q ) in this expression with the
D S
number of offline operations performed based on D’s (resp. S’s) state.
Note (modeling and implementing DE-PAKE via a (2,2)-TPAKE). In a (t + 1, n) threshold-PAKE (TPAKE)
(cf. [18]), a user holding a single password can securely establish authenticated keys with a subset of n
servers as long as no more than t of them are corrupted (and the user interacts with at least t + 1 well-
behaving servers). One can implement DE-PAKE on the basis of (2,2)-TPAKE by letting D and S act as
the two servers in a (2,2)-TPAKE scheme (this would imply the first three conditions of Definition 2 but
the last one should be added as an additional requirement). Moreover, one can use (2,2)-TPAKE as the
basis for the definition of DE-PAKE where the user only authenticates to one of the parties. However, the
dedicated DE-PAKE definition we present, and its instantiations, provide several advantages: (1) It makes
the security goals for the DE-PAKE notion clearer; (2) It allows for a more precise specification of the (strict)
upper bounds on attacker’s advantage depending on the attack setting; and (3) It allows for more efficient
implementations, in particular enabling a server-transparent DE-PAKE implementation, which cannot be
done using TPAKE. (A TPAKE cannot be server-transparent because if S runs the code as in PAKE then S’s
presence cannot help U to authenticate to D.)
Note on client security. The DE-PAKE model is designed to capture (maximal) security against online and
offline attacks where the attacker fully controls all communication channels and can compromise servers
and devices. However, as it is customary in the PAKE setting, the model does not consider the security of
the machine (the “client”) into which the user enters the password. Yet, our solutions, while vulnerable to
some forms of attack by an attacker controlling the client machine, also provide defenses to common attacks
such as keyloggers or phishing attacks (see Section 5.3).
4 A modular DE-PAKE Scheme
In this section we present and analyze our generic DE-PAKE scheme, i.e. the PTR-PAKE shown in Figure
1, which results from the composition of two independent cryptographic primitives, a PTR protocol and
a PAKE protocol with resistance to wKCI attacks (see section 3.1). For a high-level description of the
functionality of a PTR (password-to-random) scheme and its use for obtaining a DE-PAKE scheme see
Section 2. We start by describing a specific efficient PTR implementation we call FK-PTR, with is based on
the “password hardening” protocol of Ford-Kaliski [13] (Section 4.1). We then use this protocol example
to formalize the PTR notion and its security requirements (Section 4.2), and we prove that the FK-PTR
protocol satisfies the PTR security notion (Section 4.3). Finally, we prove that the generic composition of
any secure PTR scheme and any PAKE scheme with resistance to wKCI attacks results in a secure DE-
PAKE scheme (Section 4.4). Thus, our scheme can be instantiated with the FK-PTR scheme as the PTR
part and any secure wKCI-resistant PAKE protocol (e.g., [15, 18]). Moreover, if the PAKE scheme is in the
password-only model4 then the DE-PAKE scheme is also secure in this model.
4This model assumes that user/password registration is implemented over secure channels but user authentication after registra-
tion does not assume public keys or secure channels for any party in the system - only the existence of public parameters, e.g., for
defining an elliptic curve, is assumed. These parameters are common to all users of the system and are part of the client program
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
Setup
• Group G. The scheme works over a cyclic group G of prime order q, |q| = (cid:96), with generator g.
• Hash functions H, H(cid:48) map arbitrary-length strings into elements of {0, 1}τ and G, respectively, where τ is a
security parameter.
• OPRF. For a key k ← Z , we define function F as F (x) = H(x, (H(cid:48)(x))k).
q k k
• Parties. User U, Device D, Server S.
• Dictionary Dict of size 2d (a power of 2 is used for notational convenience only).
• Any PAKE protocol Π.
Initialization Phase (assumed to be executed over secure links)
• FK-PTR Initialization: U chooses password pwd ← Dict; D chooses and stores OPRF key k ← Z ; U interacts
q
with D to compute rwd = F (pwd).
k
• PAKE Initialization: User U and server S are initialized with value rwd used as a password according to the
specification of PAKE protocol Π.
Login Phase
• User-Device Interaction (FK-PTR)
1. U chooses ρ ← Z ; sends α = (H(cid:48)(pwd))ρ to D.
q
2. D checks that the received α ∈ G and if so it responds with β = αk.
3. U sets rwd = H(pwd, β1/ρ).
• User-Server Interaction (PAKE)
Follows the specification of the PAKE protocol Π where U uses rwd as its password.
Figure 2: The FK-PTR-PAKE Scheme
4.1 The FK-PTR Scheme
The particular instantiation of a PTR scheme we call FK-PTR is based on Ford-Kaliski’s “password hard-
ening” [13] or its more general interpretation as an Oblivious PRF (OPRF)5 [14, 21, 22]. In Figure 2 we
present a particular instantiation of the PTR-PAKE protocol, which we call FK-PTR-PAKE, that results
from a composition of FK-PTR, which is a specific instantiation of a PTR scheme, with a PAKE scheme.
Figure 2 fully specifies the FK-PTR protocol: It is shown as the interaction between U and D by which U
retrieves a random value rwd with the help of its password pwd. At initialization, U chooses and remembers
password pwd while D chooses and stores k ← Z . To retrieve rwd, U first blinds pwd by raising the hashed
q
value H(cid:48)(pwd) to a random exponent ρ, and send it to D. This perfectly hides pwd from D and from any
run by a user; they require the same integrity guarantees as the program itself.
5Roughly, an OPRF is a pseudorandom function that is computed by two parties, one that holds the key to the function and
learns nothing from the computation, and one that holds an input and learns the output of the function on that input and nothing
else. The reason that we define our notion of PTR instead of referring to some existing definition of OPRF is that that most existing
definitions of OPRF are game-based, e.g. [14, 21], and their properties do not seem sufficient for the PTR protocol. On the other
hand, the recent definition of UC OPRF [19] involves verifiability which we do not provide (hence the FK-PTR construction shown
here uses fewer exponentiations than the OPRF scheme of [19] based on the same OMG-DH assumption in ROM), but even that
UC OPRF notion does not imply some of the PTR properties we require, namely the 1-1 property listed as #4 in definition 3 below.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
eavesdropper on the U − D link. D checks that the received value is in the group G and if so it raises it to
the secret exponent k. Now, U can de-blind this value by raising it to the power 1/ρ to obtain H(cid:48)(pwd)k.
Finally, U hashes this value with pwd to obtain the randomized password rwd.
Note that D contains no information related to pwd hence an attacker interacting with D or even breaking
into it learns nothing about pwd. Also, U does not run any test on the value reconstructed in the FK-PTR
protocol. Hence, an attacker that interacts with U in the role of D does not learn anything about pwd from
watching the behavior of U. These “obliviousness” and minimality properties of FK-PTR are essential to
achieve PTR security and make the security analysis challenging. We will use this scheme to motivate the
security requirements from a PTR scheme as needed for composing it with a PAKE protocol and obtain
a secure DE-PAKE protocol. We establish these requirements in the next subsection and then prove the
security of FK-PTR.
4.2 PTR Security Model
Here we present the security model for (generic) PTR schemes. We first define the adversarial game under-
lying this model and then use the FK-PTR scheme and explicit potential attacks against it to motivate the
security definition.
PTR adversarial game. The game is parameterized by a function family F and a password dictionary Dict
of size 2d for some d (the power of two is chosen for notational convenience only). User U is initialized
with password pwd ← Dict and device D with a key k defining function F . Later, the parties interact
k
so that in an undisturbed interaction between U and D, where U runs with input pwd, U outputs the secret
rwd = F (pwd). Attacker A has oracle access to U and D, calling these parties with any message of its
k
choice and receiving the corresponding response as defined by the scheme depending on the internal secrets
and state of the responding party. The security requirements are defined below in Definition 3 but we first
motivate them as follows.
Attack avenues and PTR security requirements. We define security of a PTR scheme in a way that
guarantees that the generic composition of PTR and PAKE protocols results in a secure DE-PAKE scheme.
The definition consists of several requirements that we motivate next via concrete attacks showing these
requirements to be necessary (and by virtue of Thm. 3 also sufficient). Reducing the PTR requirements to
the minimum necessary is pivotal for obtaining our very efficient FK-PTR implementation that would not
be possible otherwise.
We use the notation RDict = {F (p) : p ∈ Dict} where k is D’s secret key.
k
Attack avenue 1: Leakage on rwd = F (pwd). Given that A can obtain values in RDict by interacting with
k
D on input any password in Dict we need to assure that nothing in the scheme leaks information on the
specific value of rwd = F (pwd) or otherwise the attacker can use this information to gain advantage on
k
guessing which of the RDict values is more plausible to be the correct rwd (e.g., it shouldn’t be possible for
A to test a possible value p as a candidate for pwd or to test a value r as a candidate for rwd). More generally,
to apply PAKE we need to ensure that the view of the attacker at the end of the PTR run is independent,
computationally or statistically, from rwd.
To capture this property we define the following experiment referred to as the distinguishing test. Let
rwd = F (pwd) and choose r ← RDict \ {rwd}. A is given both rwd, r (in random order) and it needs to
k
guess which one equals F (pwd).
k
Attack avenue 2: Learning values in RDict. Since A can learn values in RDict by interacting with D, A
can later interact with S in the PAKE protocol using these values. Thus, the best we can do is to require
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
the PTR protocol not to leak to A more than one value in RDict for each interaction with D. We formalize
this by defining a game where the attacker, at the end of its run, outputs a set of candidate values in RDict,
and requiring that this set does not contain more than q correct values where q is the number of rogue
D D
activations of D by A.
Attack avenue 3: Using U to test passwords. Since the attacker can influence the values output by U in the
PTR protocol, the possibility exists, at least in principle, that A makes U output a value F (pwd(cid:48)) where
k
pwd(cid:48) ∈ Dict is known to A. In this case, A can observe the PAKE run of U with S and see if pwd(cid:48) is the
correct password. This allows A to test passwords in Dict without having to act as an active MitM in the
PAKE protocol between U and S. While this attack is not possible against FK-PTR (as we will prove later),
one can show PTR schemes where this attack is feasible. There are two ways of dealing with this issue.
We either show that any such “dictated password” requires a specific rogue activation of D (as in Attack
2 above) hence treating it as any other password in RDict that A may learn by interacting with D or we
require that a secure PTR scheme does not allow for such attack. The latter is better as it prevents A from
testing passwords without a rogue activation of U but the former can be acceptable in a protocol that allows
the attack. Given that our FK-PTR protocol does not allow the attacker to use U as an oracle for testing
passwords in RDict \ {rwd}, we choose the stronger notion by adding an explicit requirement against such
possibility.
On the basis of this discussion we will require the probability that the output from U in a PTR run is
F (pwd(cid:48)) for pwd(cid:48) ∈ Dict \ {pwd} to be negligible.
k
Attack avenue 4: Running U on passwords outside RDict. The PTR-PAKE composition presents an attack
avenue not present in regular PAKE protocols: A can make U run the PAKE protocol on a password from
a dictionary RDict∗ different than RDict (note that this is different from attack scenario 3). To see this,
consider an attack in which A impersonates D to U running the protocol with a key k(cid:48) chosen by A. As a
consequence, U will run the PAKE protocol with the value F (pwd), i.e., with a value uniformly distributed
k(cid:48)
over RDict∗ = {F (p) : p ∈ Dict} where RDict∗ is known to A. This allows A to attack the PAKE protocol
k(cid:48)
as follows. It impersonates S to U as if the server’s state was initialized with password F (p) for p ∈ Dict.
k(cid:48)
If p = pwd, A succeeds in the impersonation and learns pwd.6 This attack is not contemplated in standard
PAKE models where the user is assumed to run with a password from the specified dictionary and without
adversarial choice of the password. To illustrate the dangers of such attack, imagine that the family F has a
key k∗ such that F (·) is a constant function (with an output known to A). This is a real possibility against
k∗
FK-PTR if we define F (p) to be H((H(cid:48)(p)k) in which case k∗ = 0 has exactly this effect. Similarly, if
k
there is a key k∗ for which F is a t-to-1 function, A could discard t passwords with each S-impersonation
k∗
attempt against U. Again, this is possible against FK-PTR with the modified F where A can choose β(cid:48), the
k
response returned to U, to be in a group of small-order. (Such an implementation of FK-PTR would require
to test β(cid:48) ∈ G \ {1}.)
To prevent this attack avenue we will require that any attack strategy by A for generating a dictionary
RDict∗ will induce a 1-1 function. We formalize this as follows. Let c denote a set of coins for parties
U, D, A in a PTR run. For any such c define f (p) as the output from U if its password was p. We require
c
that except for negligible probability over the choice of c, f is 1-1. (Note that each such c defines a
c
6This attack recovers pwd with 2d impersonation attempts (of S) against U and it only requires one value F k(cid:48)(pwd) used by U
as its PAKE password. This does not imply a break of the DE-PAKE scheme, since for each impersonation attempt against U, A
needs to perform a rogue activation of U in PTR. If q(cid:48) is the number of rogue activation of U in PTR and q is the number of rogue
U U
calls to U in PAKE, then the probability of successful impersonation is at most min{q , q(cid:48) }/2d. This implies that it is insecure
U U
for U to cache the value retrieved from D for use in multiple sessions - doing so allows the above attack without A having to act as
a MitM between U and D in each DE-PAKE session.
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
dictionary RDict∗ = {f (p) : p ∈ Dict} of size |Dict|.)
c
We are now ready to define PTR security.
Definition 3. We say that a PTR scheme is (q , q , T, (cid:15))-secure if for any PTR attacker A that runs time
D U
T and performs q and q rogue activations of D and U, respectively, (cid:15) is an upper bound on the values
D U
(cid:15) , (cid:15) , (cid:15) , (cid:15) defined as follows (these (cid:15) are functions of q , q , T and they correspond to the above attack
1 2 3 4 i D U
avenues):
1. the probability that A passes the distinguishing test of attack avenue 1 is at most 1/2 + (cid:15) ;
1
2. the probability that A outputs more than q values in RDict following attack avenue 2 is at most (cid:15) ;
D 2
3. the probability that U outputs F (pwd(cid:48)) for pwd(cid:48) ∈ Dict \ {pwd} is at most (cid:15) ;
k 3
4. the probability that f , as defined in attack avenue 4, is not 1-1 is less than (cid:15) .
c 4
where in all four cases the probability goes over random PTR key k and random pwd in Dict.
4.3 Security of the FK-PTR Scheme
Theorem 1 below summarizes the security of the FK-PTR scheme in terms of Definition 3. It uses the
One-More Gap Diffie-Hellman assumption defined next.
The One-More Gap DH (OMG-DH) Assumption [8,22]: Let G be a group of prime order q and k a random
value in Z . Let DH be an oracle7 that on input g ∈ G outputs gk, and let DDH be an oracle that on input
q k k
a pair (a, b) answers whether b = ak. We say that G satisfies the (cid:15) -OMG-DH assumption for function
omg
(cid:15) if any attacker A that runs in time T has probability at most (cid:15) (T, q , q ) to win the following
omg omg dh ddh
game: A is given access to the DH and DDH oracles, which it queries q and q times, resp., and is
k k dh ddh
given a set R of random elements in G. It wins if it outputs q + 1 different pairs (g, gk), g ∈ R.
dh
Theorem 1. Let G be a group where the (cid:15) (·)-One-More Gap DH holds. Let the hash functions H, H(cid:48)
omg
be modeled as random oracles and q be the number of invocations to H. Then, the FK-PTR scheme run
H
over group G with a dictionary Dict ⊂ {0, 1}τ is (q , q , T, (cid:15))-secure where (cid:15) = max{(cid:15) , (cid:15) , (cid:15) , (cid:15) } with
D U 1 2 3 4
(cid:15) = 0, (cid:15) ≤ T /2τ + (cid:15) (T, q , q ), (cid:15) ≤ 1/2τ , (cid:15) ≤ |Dict|2/2τ .
1 2 omg D H 3 4
Proof. To show that (cid:15) = 0, note that the only information A sees related to the particular value pwd is
1
α = (H(cid:48)(pwd))ρ but since ρ is chosen by U uniformly in Z , α is uniformly distributed in G independently
q
of pwd. Thus, the view of A is independent of U’s password pwd and the probability of A to win the
distinguishing test is 1/2. The bound on (cid:15) follows from Lemma 2 below proven based on the OMG-DH
2
assumption. The bound on (cid:15) follows from the fact that pwd is included under H, hence the probability that
3
for some pwd(cid:48) ∈ Dict \ {pwd}, we have H(pwd(cid:48), (H(cid:48)(pwd(cid:48)))k) = H(pwd, (H(cid:48)(pwd))k) is 2−τ where τ is
the length of the output from H. Similarly, the bound on (cid:15) follows from the collision resistance properties
4
of the (random) H.
Note: The bound |Dict|2/2τ on (cid:15) can be reduced significantly if one relaxes requirement 4 of PTR security
4
to allow for some deviation from injectiveness, e.g., allowing RDict to be of size α · |Dict| for some α, say
α = 1/2.
7DH is not defined over elements outside G hence one needs to check the input to the oracle - it can be done by an explicit
k
group membership check or by co-factor exponentiation.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
Lemma 2. Let G be a group where the (cid:15) -One-More Gap DH assumption holds and model hash functions
omg
H, H(cid:48) as random oracles. Let A be a PTR-attacker against the FK-PTR scheme that runs time T and
activates D q times with values chosen by A (i.e., rogue activations). Then, the probability that A outputs
D
more than q values in RDict (as in attack avenue 2) is at most (cid:15) = T /2τ + (cid:15) (T (cid:48), q , q ) where q is
D 2 omg D H H
the number of invocations of H by A and T (cid:48) ≈ T .
Proof. Given a PTR attacker A against the FK-PTR scheme over a (cid:15) -OMG-DH group G, we build an
omg
attacker A(cid:48) against OMG-DH in group G. A(cid:48) gets access to a DH and DDH oracles and an input in the
k k
form of an ordered set R = g , ..., g of random elements in G. A(cid:48) runs A on a simulated run of FK-PTR.
1 N
A(cid:48) uses DH to answer queries to D (i.e., A(cid:48) simulates an instance of D under key k) and uses the set R to
k
answer H(cid:48) queries. Namely, if R = g , ..., g then the first H(cid:48) query is answered with g , the second with
1 N 1
g , etc. Queries (x, y) to H are answered with random values in {0, 1}τ . A(cid:48) keeps a table of defined inputs-
2
outputs for these oracles and answers to repeated queries with the corresponding values in these tables. A(cid:48)
chooses pwd, sets H(cid:48)(pwd) = g (i.e., this is done prior to answering any H(cid:48) query from A), and queries g
1 1
to DH obtaining gk which we denote by y∗.
k 1
A(cid:48) simulates the actions of U faithfully, namely, it outputs messages of the form α = gρ for random
1
ρ ← Z and upon receiving a response β from A it computes r(cid:48) = H(pwd, β1/ρ). When A delivers a
q
message α(cid:48) to D, A(cid:48) responds to it as follows. If α(cid:48) was output by U, in which case A(cid:48) knows ρ such that
α(cid:48) = gρ , A(cid:48) responds with yρ ; otherwise A(cid:48) queries α(cid:48) from DH . In addition, for inputs (x, y) to H, A(cid:48)
1 1 k
checks that H(cid:48)(x) was queried and if so it checks, using the DDH oracle, whether the g ∈ R returned as
k j
the result of H(cid:48)(x) satisfies y = gk. If all checks pass, A(cid:48) stores the pair (g , y) in a list L.
j j
Note that the above simulation of A is perfect hence the output from A is the same as in a real execution
of FK-PTR. As claimed in the proof of Theorem 1, the view of A is independent of pwd and g (A only
1
sees values of the form gρ for one-time random ρ’s) hence it is independent of rwd (which is computed as
1
H(pwd, (H(cid:48)(pwd))k)).
Denote by R(cid:48) the set of values in RDict output by A. Let E denote the event that R(cid:48) contains a value
1
r(cid:48) = H(p, (H(cid:48)(p))k) for p ∈ Dict and that A did not query H on (p, (H(cid:48)(p))k) or H(cid:48) on p; the probability
of E is at most T /2τ . Assuming E does not happen we have that if r(cid:48) = H(p, (H(cid:48)(p))k) ∈ R(cid:48) then A
1 1
queried H(cid:48) on p and H on (p, (H(cid:48)(p))k). Since A(cid:48) chooses its responses to H(cid:48) queries from elements in the
set R, we have that r(cid:48) = H(p, g k) for g ∈ R so the query H(p, (H(cid:48)(p))k) resulted in the pair (g , g k)
j j j j
being included by A(cid:48) into the list L. Thus, |R(cid:48)| ≤ |L|.
Note that A(cid:48) has obtained pairs (g , gk) for all pairs in L as well as for (g , gk). Let L(cid:48) = L ∪ {(g , gk)}.
j j 1 1 1 1
By the DH-OMG assumption we have that the probability that L(cid:48) contains more than q elements is at
dh
most (cid:15) (T (cid:48), q , q ) where T (cid:48) is the running time of A(cid:48). So, except for this probability, we can assume
omg dh ddh
|L(cid:48)| ≤ q . We show |L| ≤ q and therefore |R(cid:48)| ≤ q as claimed by the lemma.
dh D D
A(cid:48) queries DH in two cases: Upon rogue activations of D by A and for obtaining gk. Thus, if (g , gk) ∈/
k 1 1 1
L we have q = q + 1, and together with the assumption q ≥ |L(cid:48)| = |L| + 1 we obtain that |L| ≤
dh D dh
q − 1 = q . If (g , gk) ∈ L (meaning that g was also queried by A through a rogue activation) then
dh D 1 1 1
q = q and together with q ≥ |L(cid:48)| = |L| we obtain that |L| ≤ q = q .
dh D dh dh D
In all, we have that except for probability (cid:15) = (cid:15) (T (cid:48), q , q ) + T /2τ , |R(cid:48)| ≤ |L| ≤ q . The running
2 omg D H D
time of A(cid:48) is essentially that of A if we count U activations as part of A running time and equate the cost of
a call to DH to that of a D activation and the cost of a H(cid:48) call to that of a DDH invocation.
k k
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
4.4 PTR-PAKE Composition Theorem
We are now ready to prove the composition theorem showing that composing a secure PTR with a PAKE
that offers the wKCI-resistance property, results in a secure DE-PAKE scheme (with security definitions as
presented in Section 3). As noted earlier, if the PTR and PAKE schemes dispense of PKI so does our DE-
PAKE protocol: An example of such composed scheme free of PKI (except for initialization) is presented
in Section 5.1.
Theorem 3. Let P be a (q , q(cid:48) , T , (cid:15) )-secure PTR scheme and Π be a (q , q , T , (cid:15) )-secure PAKE
D U P P S U Π Π
protocol that is also (cid:15) -wKCI-resistant, then the DE-PAKE scheme C that uses the composition of both
KC
protocols is a (q , q , q(cid:48) , q , T , (cid:15) )-secure DE-PAKE protocol where (cid:15) = (cid:15) + (3q(cid:48) + 1)(cid:15) + (cid:15) +
S U U D C C C Π U P KC
qU +qS .
2τ−1
Proof. The proof of the Theorem is presented in Appendix A.
5 Instantiations and Extensions
In this section, we discuss several instantiations and extensions of our PTR-PAKE scheme showing the
practicality and flexibility of our approach. We first present a full and detailed instantiation of PTR-PAKE
that is secure in the PKI-free setting. Then, we show how to provide transparent DE-PAKE support to
currently deployed web services, namely, armoring an existing service against online and offline attacks
without changing the server. Finally, we comment on extensions that provide defenses against client-side
and phishing attacks.
5.1 PKI-Free DE-PAKE
Figure 3 describes a full instantiation of a PKI-free PTR-PAKE protocol using the FK-PTR scheme from
Figure 2 and a PKI-free PAKE protocol with resistance against wKCI attacks adapted from the threshold
PAKE (TPAKE) protocol of [18, 20]. More precisely, the PAKE protocol we use is an adaptation of the
variant of the TPAKE protocol from [18, 20] with resistance against wKCI attacks, proven secure in the
PKI-free (or CRS) model, to the single-server case (i.e., a (1,1)-TPAKE).
The protocol as described in Figure 3 also requires a key-exchange mechanism (the “KE formula”) to
set a session key between server and user (in particular for the sake of mutual authentication). Different
protocols can be used here, for example, based on shared keys or public keys, with or without forward
secrecy, etc. However, we note that in order to achieve security against server compromise (needed to
provide the maximal security of a PTR-PAKE scheme) one must use a public key mechanism. Otherwise, the
server would be storing a secret authentication key for the user which would allow an attacker to impersonate
the user to the server in case of server compromise. Thus, while we allow for different key exchange
mechanisms through a general KE formula, we do require these to be based on public keys for both parties
(we also accommodate ephemeral keys if forward secrecy is desired). For illustration, and as a concrete and
efficient instantiation that preserves a minimal number of messages and provides forward secrecy, we define
next the key computation corresponding to the HMQV protocol [24] in terms of the KE formula used in the
protocol:
• Set e = H(X , S), e = H(X , U), where S, U represent the parties’ identities.
u u s s
• S computes K = H ((X
u
P
u
eu)xs+esps); U computes K = H ((X
s
P
s
es)xu+eupu).
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
Parties: User U, Device D, Server S.
Public Parameters and Components
• Group G of prime order q with generator g.
• Hash functions H, H(cid:48) with ranges {0, 1}2τ , G and Z , respectively, for τ a security parameter.
q
• Pseudorandom function (PRF) f with range {0, 1}2τ .
• OPRF function F (x) = H(x, (H(cid:48)(x))k) for key k ∈ Z .
k q
• Key exchange formula KE: on input long-term and ephemeral private-public keys outputs shared key K ∈ {0, 1}τ .
Initialization Phase (assumed to be executed over secure links)
• FK-PTR Initialization: Run FK-PTR initialization of Fig. 2 to choose pwd, device’s OPRF key k , and compute
d
rwd = F (pwd).
kd
• PAKE Initialization:
1. S chooses p
s
∈
R
Z
q
and sends to U the public key P
s
= gps (P
s
can be used with all of S’s users).
2. U chooses z ∈ {0, 1}τ , k ∈ Z ;
R s R q
sets values c = z ⊕ F (rwd), r = f (0), C = H(r, rwd, c), p = f (1) mod q;
ks z u z
computes P
u
= gpu and m
u
= f
z
(2, P
u
, P
s
); and sends to S the values c, C, k
s
, P
u
, m
u
.
3. S stores c, C, k , P , m in its U-associated storage (if P is user-specific, it also stores P and p ).
s u u s s s
Login Phase
• User-Device Interaction (FK-PTR)
Follows the FK-PTR protocol as per Fig. 2 to obtain rwd on input pwd from U and input k from D.
d
• User-Server Interaction (PAKE)
1. U chooses ρ, x ← Z ; initiates a key exchange session with S by sending its identity U, the value
u q
α = (H(cid:48)(rwd))ρ and X
u
= gxu.
2. S proceeds as follows:
(a) Checks that α ∈ G;
(b) Retrieves (c, C, k , P , m ) from its U-associated storage;
s u u
(c) Picks x
s
∈
R
Z
q
and computes β = αks, X
s
= gxs.
(d) Sends to U: β, c, C, P , m , P , X .
u u s s
(e) Computes K = KE(p , x , P , X ) and outputs session key SK = f (0).
s s u u K
3. U proceeds as follows:
(a) Sets z = c ⊕ H(rwd, β1/ρ), r = f (0), p = f (1) mod q.
z u z
(b) Aborts unless the following conditions hold: β ∈ G, C = H(r, rwd, c), m = f (2, P , P ).
u z u s
(c) Computes K = KE(p , x , P , X ) and outputs session key SK = f (0).
u u s s K
• Explicit Authentication
If explicit authentication of the parties is required then S adds the value f (1) to its message and U adds a third
K
message with value f (2). Each party verifies the value received from the other party.
K
Figure 3: Instantiation of FK-PTR-PAKE with PKI-free PAKE protocol from [18, 20]
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
5.2 Server-Transparent DE-PAKE
An important implication of the modularity of our PTR-PAKE scheme is that the user can use any secure
PTR protocol to derive a hardened password rwd from her nominal password pwd, and then register rwd
as her actual password with an existing server, where the latter implements any wKCI-resistant password
authentication protocol. Since the password authentication protocol is independent of the hardening proce-
dure, it can be the standard password-over-TLS protocol used in the defacto standard PKI setting. (Note that
if the server stores a salted password hash then the password-over-TLS authentication is wKCI-resistant.)8
In such case the login phase of the PTR-PAKE protocol consists of the user typing her password pwd, the
client terminal and the device executing the PTR protocol to compute the hardened password rwd, and the
client terminal sending rwd to the server over a TLS session. In this setting, no modification to an existing
service is required. We refer to this mechanism as Server-Transparent DE-PAKE.
There are several advantages of this setting: (1) the user can simply remember the short nominal pwd
but register with a strong high-entropy password that significantly increases resistance to online and offline
guessing attacks (in particular, offline-only attacks on a compromised server are not possible); (2) nominal
password pwd can be the same or reused among multiple services, but the OPRF key associated with each
service stored on the device can be different (hence also rwd would be different), and therefore the compro-
mise of the password rwd at one server will not reveal the actual password pwd and will not compromise the
user’s accounts with other services; (3) rather than asking the user to frequently change the password and
memorize the updated password, only the key on the device can be changed, which improves the usability.
We are currently studying the application of this server-transparent FK-PTR-PAKE scheme to building
a secure password manager.
5.3 Resisting Client-Side & Phishing Attacks
Malicious code and keyloggers remain a threat to browsers in spite of browser security enhancements.
Because we use a keyed password hardening scheme, an attacker who learns pwd by a key-logger or shoulder
surfing can not authenticate to the service without interacting with the device. However, an attacker who
compromises a client terminal can obtain rwd. By using service-specific keys at the device we guarantee
that an attacker who obtains rwd can only compromise the particular service associated with it; even if pwd
is used for multiple services, the rwd values derived for each service are random and independent .
Still, one can reduce the threat of the malware attack to the by combining our scheme with the traditional
two-factor authentication (TFA) mechanism, i.e., having D generate a PRF on a time value or a nonce under
a key that D shares with S. Note that in a traditional TFA mechanism, compromising the client allows the
attacker to hijack the current login session of the user, but does not allow the attacker to login in future
sessions (due to the use of “one-time” PIN codes). Integrating our DE-PAKE protocol with traditional TFA
could provide the same level of security in the event of client compromise, while providing all the other
security properties of our DE-PAKE scheme.
Moreover, resistance to phishing attacks can be achieved if in the computation of rwd, one concatenates
the URL being accessed to pwd (i.e., rwd being computed as F (pwd|url)). This is similar to the PwdHash
K
d
approach [25] except that in PwdHash, the attacker that obtains the randomized password through phishing
can mount a dictionary attack to find the user’s password while in our case this is not feasible.
8Moreover, if the server implements password authentication badly and does not use salted hash, the resulting PTR+PAKE
instance will not have strong KCI-resistance, but it will not endager any other instances where the user re-uses the same password
pwd. This is because learning rwd = F (pwd) where k is the OPRF key which D associates with server S , does not help in
i ki i i
finding either pwd or rwd = F (pwd) for k independent from k (assuming device D remains uncorrupted).
j kj j i
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
Integrating our DE-PAKE techniques with existing two-factor authentication mechanisms (e.g., PIN
based) to simultaneously enhance security against offline-online attacks and client compromise is left as a
future work item.
6 Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we considered the problem of armoring password protocols against online guessing attacks as
well as offline dictionary attacks in the event of server or device compromise. We proposed a novel, effi-
cient and modular device-enhanced password protocol (DE-PAKE) and formally analyzed its security. In
contrast to previous work on this subject, our protocol does not require the presence of a public key infras-
tructure or the availability of authenticated public keys (except, possibly, for initial password registration)
thus relaxing the concerns regarding PKI failures or compromises. At the same time, when an authentic and
uncompromised public key of the server is available, our protocol further guarantees resilience to server im-
personation even when the user’s password is disclosed. Remarkably, we can achieve these benefits without
necessitating service-side changes.
Finally, we note that, thanks to our modular architecture, one can further increase the resistance to server
compromise by using a threshold-PAKE protocol (e.g., [18]), in which case an attacker needs to compromise
a threshold of servers in addition to the device before being able to mount an offline dictionary attack.
References
[1] Anonymous hackers claim to leak 28,000 PayPal passwords on global protest day. Available at: http:
//goo.gl/oPv2h.
[2] Blizzard servers hacked; emails, hashed passwords stolen. Available at: http://goo.gl/OTNWJC.
[3] Hackers compromised nearly 5M Gmail passwords. Available at: http://goo.gl/IRu07u.
[4] LinkedIn Confirms Account Passwords Hacked. Available at: http://goo.gl/UBWuY0.
[5] RSA breach leaks data for hacking securid tokens. Available at: http://goo.gl/tcEoS.
[6] RSA SecurID software token cloning: a new how-to. Available at: http://goo.gl/qkSFY.
[7] Russian Hackers Amass Over a Billion Internet Passwords. Available at: http://goo.gl/aXzqj8.
[8] M. Bellare, C. Namprempre, D. Pointcheval, and M. Semanko. The one-more-RSA-inversion problems
and the security of Chaum’s blind signature scheme. 16(3):185–215, June 2003.
[9] M. Bellare, D. Pointcheval, and P. Rogaway. Authenticated key exchange secure against dictionary
attacks. In Advances in Cryptology – Eurocrypt, 2000.
[10] S. Blake-Wilson, D. Johnson, and A. Menezes. Key agreement protocols and their security analysis.
In Proceedings of the 6th IMA International Conference on Cryptography and Coding, pages 30–45,
London, UK, UK, 1997. Springer-Verlag.
[11] I. Dacosta, M. Ahamad, and P. Traynor. Trust no one else: Detecting MITM attacks against SSL/TLS
without third-parties. In European Symposium on Research in Computer Security, 2012.
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
[12] A. Everspaugh, R. Chaterjee, S. Scott, A. Juels, and T. Ristenpart. The pythia prf service. In 24th
USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 15), 2015.
[13] W. Ford and B. S. Kaliski Jr. Server-assisted generation of a strong secret from a password. In Enabling
Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises, 2000.
[14] M. J. Freedman, Y. Ishai, B. Pinkas, and O. Reingold. Keyword search and oblivious pseudorandom
functions. In Theory of Cryptography. 2005.
[15] C. Gentry, P. MacKenzie, and Z. Ramzan. A method for making password-based key exchange resilient
to server compromise. In Advances in Cryptology-CRYPTO. 2006.
[16] M. Georgiev, S. Iyengar, S. Jana, R. Anubhai, D. Boneh, and V. Shmatikov. The most dangerous
code in the world: Validating ssl certificates in non-browser software. In Proceedings of the ACM
Conference on Computer and Communications Security, 2012.
[17] D. P. Jablon. Password authentication using multiple servers. In The Cryptographer’s Track at RSA
Conference (CT-RSA). 2001.
[18] S. Jarecki, A. Kiayias, and H. Krawczyk. Round-optimal password-protected secret sharing and T-
PAKE in the password-only model. In Advances in Cryptology–ASIACRYPT. 2014.
[19] S. Jarecki, A. Kiayias, and H. Krawczyk. Round-optimal password-protected secret sharing and T-
PAKE in the password-only model. In Advances in Cryptology - ASIACRYPT 2014 - 20th Interna-
tional Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptology and Information Security, Kaoshiung,
Taiwan, R.O.C., December 7-11, 2014, Proceedings, Part II, pages 233–253, 2014.
[20] S. Jarecki, A. Kiayias, H. Krawczyk, and J. Xu. Highly Efficient and Composable Password-Protected
Secret Sharing. In 1st IEEE European Symposium on Security and Privacy (EuroS&P). 2015.
[21] S. Jarecki and X. Liu. Efficient oblivious pseudorandom function with applications to adaptive ot and
secure computation of set intersection. In Theory of Cryptography. 2009.
[22] S. Jarecki and X. Liu. Fast secure computation of set intersection. In Security and Cryptography for
Networks. 2010.
[23] H. Krawczyk. HMQV: A high-performance secure diffie-hellman protocol. pages 546–566, 2005.
[24] H. Krawczyk. Hmqv: A high-performance secure diffie-hellman protocol. In Advances in Cryptology–
CRYPTO, 2005.
[25] B. Ross, C. Jackson, N. Miyake, D. Boneh, and J. C. Mitchell. Stronger password authentication using
browser extensions. In Usenix security Symposium, 2005.
[26] M. Shirvanian, S. Jarecki, N. Saxena, and N. Nathan. Two-factor authentication resilient to server
compromise using mix-bandwidth devices. In Network & Distributed System Security Symposium,
2014.
[27] J. Sunshine, S. Egelman, H. Almuhimedi, N. Atri, and L. F. Cranor. Crying wolf: An empirical study
of ssl warning effectiveness. In USENIX Security Symposium, 2009.
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
A Proofs
A.1 Lemma 4
We formulate and prove Lemma 4 that we use as a main component in the proof of the composition theorem,
Theorem 3.
Lemma 4. Let Π be a (q , q , T, (cid:15))-secure PAKE protocol. Then the following holds for any PAKE-
S U
adversary A against Π. Let Dict ⊂ {0, 1}τ be a dictionary composed of the union of two disjoints sets
Dict and Dict , where Dict is known to A and Dict is chosen as a random subset of {0, 1}τ \ Dict and
1 2 1 2 1
unknown to A. Then the advantage of A against Π running with dictionary Dict is at most
min{q + q , |Dict |} q + q
S U 1 S U
+ + (cid:15).
|Dict| 2τ−1
Proof. Denote q = q + q . The winning probability of A when the password is selected at random in D
A S U
satisfies (see below for explanations):
P r [A wins : p ∈ Dict ] · P r [p ∈ Dict ] +
1 1
P r [A wins : p ∈ Dict ] · P r [p ∈ Dict ]
2 2
1 min{q , |Dict |} |Dict | q |Dict |
A 1 1 A 2
≤ + + + (cid:15)
2 |Dict 1 | |Dict| |Dict 1 | |Dict|
1 min{q , |Dict |} 2q
A 1 A
≤ + + + (cid:15)
2 |Dict| 2τ
as claimed in the lemma.
To see why the above inequalities hold, first note that the case p ∈ Dict corresponds to a regular
1
PAKE game with known dictionary Dict hence the attacker’s winning probability in this case is at most
1
1/2 + min{q , |Dict |}/|Dict | + (cid:15); on the other hand, P r [p ∈ Dict ] = |Dict |/|Dict| from which the
A 1 1 1 1
first term in the final expression follows ((cid:15) and 1/2 are separated as they are common to both terms). Note
that the minimum in min{q , |Dict |} simply means that the advantage q /|Dict | is capped at 1 even for
A 1 A 1
larger values of q . As for the second term, the case p ∈ Dict is, from the point of view of A, equivalent
A 2
to a dictionary Dict = 2τ \ Dict since all elements outside Dict are equiprobable. Hence, the winning
1 1 1
probability in this case is at most 1 + qA + (cid:15) while P r [p ∈ Dict ] = |Dict |/|Dict|, resulting in the
2 |Dict1| 2 2
second term. Finally, we observe that when |Dict | ≤ 2τ−1, then qA |Dict2| ≤ qA ≤ qA , and when
1 |Dict1| |Dict| |Dict1| 2τ−1
|Dict | ≥ 2τ−1 then qA |Dict2| ≤ qA ≤ qA ≤ qA .
1 |Dict1| |Dict| |Dict| |Dict1| 2τ−1
A.2 Proof of Theorem 3
Proof. We consider 4 cases as in Definition 2 according to whether D and S are corrupted or not. We focus
on the main ideas of the proof - a formal presentation would represent the arguments in the proof below as
a sequence of game transitions.
Case 1: No corruption. We start by addressing the following modeling issue. In the CRS setting, a PTR-
PAKE attacker A can make the user U run with a password generated via a function f applied to the U’s
c
password pwd as in attack avenue 4. Since A has no information about pwd (first PTR requirement), this
is equivalent to U choosing a random independent password rwd∗ from the dictionary RDict∗ = f (Dict)
c
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
(which by the 1-1 requirement is of the same size as user U’s dictionary Dict). Also, since by the third
requirement of PTR security, rwd∗ is different than U’s real password rwd = F (pwd), then the runs of U
k
with rwd∗ are independent from those with rwd (runs of a user with different passwords are independent
of each other since the only shared state between runs, or sessions, is the password). Thus, we can treat U
running with rwd∗ as a separate user from U, one created by the attacker with dictionary RDict∗ = f (Dict).
c
Note that U does not have rwd∗ registered with S or any other server (the attacker is allowed to create such
unregistered users). We will refer to these derived users as “split users” and consider them as additional
regular users in a PAKE protocol.9
In summary, thanks to requirements 1, 3, 4 of PTR security, the ability of the PTR attacker to induce dif-
ferent password outputs from U translates into the ability of the PAKE adversary to create independent “split
users”. Note that user U can run with different dictionaries RDict∗, corresponding to different functions f ,
c
and each such run generates a new split user. On the other hand, the PTR attacker may choose to use the
same f multiple times which we model as repeated runs of the same split user (since in all these runs the
c
user will use the same password rwd∗). Thus, in what follows, we assume a setting (or game) where each
split user runs with a password pwd∗ that is independent of pwd and independent of other users’ pwd∗, and
that these passwords are chosen from dictionaries RDict∗ of size 2d. Formally, we need to apply a standard
sequence-of-games argument to quantify the increase in the advantage of the attacker in this game transition.
Specifically, each split user activation adds a (cid:15) + (cid:15) + (cid:15) advantage to the attacker success for a total of
1 3 4
q(cid:48) ((cid:15) + (cid:15) + (cid:15) ).
U 1 3 4
For clarity, we will use Π∗ to denote the PAKE protocol Π when run against an attacker that can create
split users with independent passwords as above. The PAKE security of Π implies the PAKE security of Π∗
(the PAKE model requires Π to be secure with any number of adversarially generated users).
Having established this correspondence between PTR-induced passwords and split users we can now
reduce the DE-PAKE security of a PTR-PAKE scheme to the PAKE security of Π. That is, we build a PAKE
attacker SIM against Π given a DE-PAKE attacker A against the composed DE-PAKE scheme C. For this
SIM simulates the PTR part of the protocol as follows. Let Dict be the dictionary used by the target user U.
SIM chooses k for D and pwd ← Dict for U in the PTR game. It defines the dictionary on which Π∗ runs
as RDict = {F (p) : p ∈ Dict}. By the 1-1 property of F , RDict is of the same size as Dict (note that Π
k k
needs to be secure against any dictionary, even an adversarially chosen one).
This simulation of P is perfect as it uses full information on the parties’ secrets (pwd and k). Then, by
virtue of PTR security (requirement 1), we have that the view of the DE-PAKE attacker A is independent,
up to an advantage loss of (cid:15) , of pwd and of the password rwd = F (pwd) used by U in protocol Π.
1 k
Now consider the PAKE activations by the DE-PAKE attacker A of the target pair (U, S), i.e., the acti-
vations of S as well as of U running with password rwd and of U running with passwords induced by A in
the PTR activation of U. We start by considering the activations of S and U according to the regular PAKE
model and then consider the activations related to split users.
The attacker has partial knowledge of the dictionary RDict from which U’s password rwd is chosen.
Specifically, by requirement 2 of PTR security, we can assume (up to an advantage difference of (cid:15) ), that A
2
knows at most q elements in RDict, where q is the number of rogue activations of D by A. In the view of
D D
A, the rest of RDict is distributed uniformly (or pseudorandomly) in {0, 1}τ . Thus, we are in the setting of
Lemma 4, hence the probability of A winning the DE-PAKE game in a session at U or S is at most
min{q + q , q } q + q
U S D U S
+ + (cid:15) . (2)
|Dict| 2τ−1 Π
9The only difference with traditional users is that they are not registered with any server, although we could define a special
server S with which the attacker register split users but S is never activated by the attacker.
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
We now consider Π activations of U running with a password from an attacker-induced dictionary
RDict∗, or the equivalent Π∗-activation by A of a split user U∗. Such user runs with a password rwd∗ from
a dictionary RDict∗ of the same size as Dict and where rwd∗ (cid:54)= rwd; in particular, rwd∗ is not registered
with S. Thus, activations of S are irrelevant to this case but A may activate U∗ (with rogue send messages
purportedly coming from S) in order to attempt at winning a test session at U∗. Since this attack is a legit-
imate attack against the PAKE protocol Π∗, we have that its success is at most q∗ /|RDict∗| = q∗ /|Dict|
U U
where q∗ is the number of activations of U∗. The sum of all activations of all split users U∗ derived from U
U
is bounded by the number of activations in Π of user U thus the total success probability of A against split
users (i.e., against U running on an induced password pwd∗) is bounded by q /|Dict|.
U
However, note that each activation of U in C with an induced password other than rwd (equivalently,
the activation of a split user U∗ in Π∗) requires a rogue activation of U by A in the PTR protocol. Thus, if
we denote by q(cid:48) the number of rogue U activations in the PTR protocol, we need to adjust the above bound
U
to min{q , q(cid:48) }/|Dict| (i.e., this form of attack can be exploited only if the activation of U as a Π user is
U U
matched by a rogue activation of U as a PTR user).
The final bound on A’s advantage is obtained by adding together the above term min{q , q(cid:48) }/|Dict| and
U U
the one in (2). Before doing so we note that the value q in (2) only counts rogue activations of U running
U
on the correct U’s password rwd while the q in min{q , q(cid:48) }/|Dict| counts rogue activations running on
U U U
an unregistered password rwd∗. If we denote the number of the first type of activations by p and the latter
U
type by p∗ , we have that the total advantage of the attacker is
U
min{p + q , q } min{p∗ , q(cid:48) } p + q
U S D + U U + U S + (cid:15)
|Dict| |Dict| 2τ−1 Π
min{p + q + p∗ , q + q(cid:48) } p + q
≤ U S U D U + U S + (cid:15) .
|Dict| 2τ−1 Π
Noting that q = p + p∗ and adding to the above expression the attacker’s advantage from PTR game
U U U
transitions ((cid:15) + q(cid:48) ((cid:15) + (cid:15) + (cid:15) )), we get that the total advantage of the DE-PAKE attacker A is bounded
2 U 1 3 4
by
min{q + q , q + q(cid:48) }
U S D U + (cid:15)(cid:48)
|Dict| C
where (cid:15)(cid:48) = pU +qS + (cid:15) + (3q(cid:48) + 1)(cid:15) .
C 2τ−1 Π U P
We now consider the cases where server or device are corrupted. In all these cases the above analysis of
case 1 holds except that some of the online operations can now be performed offline.
Case 2: D corrupted. In this case the attacker learns k, hence it does not need to access D via online
activations. By the same argument in Case 1 based on Lemma 4, we have that if A computes q values
D
from the dictionary RDict (by offline computation using k), its advantage in the DE-PAKE game where it
activates S and U for q and q times, respectively, is bounded by equation (2). If, in addition, A attacks U
S U
in PTR with q(cid:48) queries, q in (2) becomes q + q(cid:48) . But in any case, given the min in (2), A’s advantage
U D D U
(even with |Dict| offline F computations) is at most (q + q )/|Dict| + (cid:15)(cid:48) .
k U S C
Case 3: S corrupted (or U-compromised). Consider first attacks that do not involve rogue queries to U. In
this case, by virtue of the PAKE protocol Π being (cid:15) -wKCI-resistant, we have that an attacker against Π
KC
that knows q passwords from the dictionary RDict has advantage at most min{q , q}/|Dict|+(cid:15) , where q
S KC S
counts offline operations based on S’s state. On the other hand, as in the argument of case 1, by requirement
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
2 of PTR security, we can assume that A knows at most q elements in RDict, where q is the number of
D D
rogue activations of D by A. Thus, we have (up to probability (cid:15) ) that q ≤ q , and the advantage of the
2 D
attacker (without U queries) is at most min{q , q }/|Dict| + (cid:15) . When adding attacks via U we get this
S D KC
expression to be min{q + q , q + q(cid:48) }/|Dict| + (cid:15) + (cid:15)(cid:48) and, regardless of the value of q , this is at
S U D U KC C S
most (q + q(cid:48) )/|Dict| + (cid:15) + (cid:15)(cid:48) .
D U KC C
Case 4: D and S corrupted. The combination of the arguments in cases 2 and 3 implies that an attack when
both S and D are corrupted achieves equation (2) where q is the number of outputs of F computed by A
D k
using its knowledge of k and q is the number of passwords run by A in its offline dictionary attack based
S
on S’s state.
24